Speaker 1: The Naturalistic Decision Making podcast with Brian Moon and Laura Millattello. This podcast series brings you interviews with leading NDM researchers who study and support people who make decisions under stress.
Welcome to the Naturalistic Decision Making podcast. This is Laura Mittello from Applied Decision Science.

Speaker 2: And I'm Brian Moon from Paradine Technologies. Today we are fortunate to be talking with Penny Sanderson. Penny is a professor of cognitive engineering and human factors at the University of Queensland, where she has appointments in the School of Psychology, the School of Information Technology and Electrical Engineering, and the School of Clinical Medicine. She graduated with her BA with Honors from the University of Western Australia, and then completed her PhD at the University of Toronto in Canada. She worked for 11 years at the University of Illinois at Urbana Champagne before returning to her native Australia. In her research, Penny develops tests and applies theories about the human role in complex socio-technical systems. She's conducted research in healthcare, power systems, air defense, air traffic control, and emergency response. She has made important contributions to our understanding of the impact of workplace interruptions on work performance, the design of effective auditory interfaces and safety critical systems, and the perceptual, cognitive, and social effects of wearable technologies. Penny is a fellow of the Academy of Social Sciences in Australia, the Human Factors and Ergonomic Society, and the International Ergonomics Association. She has received many awards, including the Distinguished International Colleagues Award and the Paul M Fitz Educator Award from the Human Factors and Ergonomic Society, the Jerome H Eli Best Paper Award twice from the Journal Human Factors, the Franklin V Taylor Award for outstanding contributions in the field of applied experimental engineering psychology, from the American Psychological Association. Penny, thank you for speaking with us today.

Speaker 3: Thank you very much, Laura and Brian for inviting me.

Speaker 1: So I wanted to start by going back to the very beginning of your career. Do you remember the very first paper you ever published?

Speaker 3: Yes, I do. Um, actually the very first paper I published was with the Human Factors Association of Canada when I was a PhD student. And uh that was with some students. I was in one of Neville Murra's classes at University of Toronto, and uh we wrote a paper on um, how often supervisors should sample information in a simulated control room. And unfortunately, it's very difficult for me to know what was in that paper because when it was published in the proceedings, they only published every second page in in the paper. Um, so it's sort of lost to history now.

Speaker 1: Wow. So that was about power plant power plant control rooms?

Speaker 3: Yes, it was a very simulated laboratory, a very simple simulated laboratory experiment where we had a series of dials and we looked at how often people would sample the dials. So it was very much in in the tradition of Tom Sheridan's work and John Sender's work. Um, Neville worked very closely with um Tom Sheridan and John Senders. And so it was a a class exercise that we had done, but it was sufficiently interesting that it got accepted at the the local conference there. So that was my first experience. That was a conference paper, and that was in 1982. But my first journal paper was much later than that. It was in 1989 after I had started at University of Illinois. And uh, so um, I had uh a journal paper then that was actually a very psychological paper. It was published in JEP learning memory and cognition, and that was about um whether people can verbalize knowledge that they have when they're interacting with a dynamic system. So it was getting closer to some of my later work.

Speaker 1: Interesting. So you started as many people do in academia doing experiments and kind of uh simplified simulated tasks. And so I wonder um how you kind of made the turn to working in more complex naturalistic um environments with with this, you know, broader focus on cognitive engineering. How how did you make your way there?

Speaker 3: Well, it's a great great question because um these days many people, many students are fortunate enough to start in that area. Whereas I had to make the the turn if you like from traditional psychology, traditional experimental psychology to these richer more naturalistic fields. Uh, so I suppose um I suppose it started for me in the very final year of my undergraduate degree at University of Western Australia. I was getting trained in a pretty traditional way in experimental psychology. And then in my final year, we had a visiting professor, Stephen Schwartz, an American, um, who uh was just starting a career in Australia at that point. And uh he gave us some lectures on human factors and he was talking about work that was being done at NASA, he was talking about things like the London Underground transit map and how they had been designed for human use. And I thought that was a pretty fascinating area. But uh I didn't get started in it until much later. After I I went to University of Toronto to do my my Masters and PhD, I was still headed towards doing studies in human memory. But it wasn't really grabbing me for the first year that that I was there. And um but then one of my fellow students uh said very excitedly that that she'd heard that Neville Murra was coming to University of Toronto. He had been working in the United Kingdom. And uh Neville of course was very well known for for work on attention on um the fate of stimuli that are attended or unattended. Can we um remember or or grasp information that that we're um not really attending to. And she said, well, Neville's coming to to the university but he's now in engineering. He's not in psychology, he's doing human factors work. So we went over and took one of his courses, and I found that really, really interesting because he and and other people in in the Department of Industrial Engineering like John Senders were applying completely different paradigms to an understanding of human interaction with with systems. And the thing that was really fascinating about that also was that they were members of this wonderful international community of scholars that that were trying to solve problems about human system interaction post three mile Island and I know, you know, quite a few um previous paper in your podcasts have talked about that era. And uh so it all fell in place for me at that point.

Speaker 1: That's so interesting. So I didn't realize that psychologists were moving into industrial engineering departments and that was part of the magic was happening at that time.

Speaker 3: Yes, that the the fascinating thing was the nature of the problems that that were being solved. And of course at that time a lot of focus was on nuclear safety, nuclear human factors. And uh so um there were a lot of people coming in and out of the department, a lot of uh uh colleagues in that area. So that's where I first got to meet Dave Woods, Yens Rasmussen, Liz um Lizanne Banebridge. They all um visited the Department of Industrial Engineering at University of Toronto where Neville was working at the time. Um, so it was a wonderful introduction to the the community of practice if you like. And uh so and then as a student and and the whole community of students, they were very much welcomed into that community and and we had the opportunity to go to conferences and meetings and so on. And uh that aspect of of science and engineering is so important. um bringing students into the community of practice and and uh that's the thing that that was so delightful about um being a student there at the time.

Speaker 1: Nice. And so was your dissertation what was your dissertation about?

Speaker 3: My dissertation was about mental models and how people acquire an understanding of complex systems. So that that the nature of the question was very much inspired by the work that was around me. How did do people develop mental models of complex systems? But there was still enough of a basic psychologist in me that um I developed a a little microworld to test it. And so the microworld was a microworld of uh an electronic circuit. So how do people develop an understanding of how that electronic circuit works? And it was a very strange thesis and and I remember discussing it as I was getting towards the end with uh Lizanne Banebridge. And uh she just pointed out the dilemma with that kind of work. She said, well look, it's not applied enough to be useful, and it's not basic enough to really illuminate any basic theories. So why are you doing it? But I managed to succeed, I managed to get through it. Um but it it's it was a very nice example of the the dilemma when you're trying to straddle those two worlds to to um have a world that you can control on the one hand as a basic scientist, but on the other hand try to address complex problems. It's very difficult when working that way to um to to to really do useful research.

Speaker 1: Sure. Yeah, and I feel like we're all still trying to figure out that balance.

Speaker 3: Yeah. And I still am as well. So I have to confess, yeah. I've gotten slightly better at it, but I can't say that I've solved it by any means. But some of um Yens Rasmussen's work um has been very useful there talking about the boundaries at which we do experiments. And uh Kathy Burns uh from University of Waterloo and I wrote a paper a few years ago, just revisiting some of Rasmussen's ideas there. Um because he was saying, look, we do different kinds of experiments and um at different boundaries of realism. And if we acknowledge that fact and don't try to overclaim for our experiments, um if if we know just how much we can generalize and can't generalize, then we don't fall into um problems of of claiming too much for for our experiments. And that that is I think has been very useful for just positioning um some more tightly controlled work. Rasmussen's helped us put it in its context and not overclaim for it. And that's been very useful for for some of the more basic work that I do to explain it to people who say, how does that generalize?

Speaker 2: So, so Penny, if you're talking about uh projects that are either applied enough to be useful uh or basic enough to be illuminating, uh I'll I'll I'll throw in another adjective that is fulfilling. Can can you think across all the projects you've done? Um which project has been kind of the most fulfilling for you personally or professionally?

Speaker 3: Most fulfilling. Um, well, I I suppose the one that uh I I've really loved the most is some work that that I did. And in fact, uh William Wong talked about this when he did his podcast with you. And that was work with with a very iconic hydro power system in Australia. Um, this is a a very large electricity provider generator, and uh it was built in in the post-World War II era. And uh people came from all over the world after the Second World War War to to work on this scheme, to build it. And um I started working with them because um in about 20 years ago, Australia's power industry was deregulated. So it started working on a more commercial market basis and a spot market for electricity was developed where um people could bid to uh generate electricity and sell it into the market. And prices would change very, very rapidly on a moment by moment basis. So this was a completely different way for the electricity industry to work. And I got called in initially to do some consulting work with with this particular provider because their their operators in their central control room were complaining of eye strain in the in the control room. And one thing that I had learned from my teachers at University of Toronto is the problem that you're presented with when you go in and do a consulting job is very often not what the real problem is. So I remember being on the phone as they were initially describing this problem with the operator's eye strain and the the new deregulated environment, and I thought, I bet you that's not what the problem is. And so I made a first visit up there and it became very clear that the operators were faced with an entirely new way of doing their work. They had new information systems, new displays, uh which were required because now they had this commercial way of interacting with with the the market and and the way they were selling uh electricity to the market. And um so their problems were more than just eye strain, in a sense it was brain strain in a way. And so the whole problem opened up and uh it was one to do with uh the way the control room was organized, the the the way they were able to um if you like to get on top with what was happening in the market. Um the the information that they needed because many of them had engineering backgrounds, they didn't have financial backgrounds. So uh from that basis, a series of consulting projects and then a a full research project eventuated and uh I brought William Wong in on that and we had a wonderful time learning about the electricity industry and learning about the way these operators did their job. And the thing that was so charming about that, and the reason that we both loved that problem or or that domain so much was um, well, firstly the nature of the problems, they were so rich. Secondly, that the safety critical nature of the problem. Uh these people were controlling huge amounts of water and huge engineering infrastructure in Australia. And the the pride that everybody had, management right down to the workers in their industry, in their organization was very infectious. And uh actually to this day, I'm still in contact with with the person who was our contract monitor there, even though we finished that job about over 15 years ago. So that was uh the the project that I think uh Brian that's been the most fulfilling because we were able to do a lot of very interesting work there. But neither of us, neither William or I really thought we didn't know very much about power systems engineering and at the end, we just knew a little bit more, but we were still basically very ignorant of it. But uh we felt that that we had grown tremendously in doing that and our engagement with that organization had been really fulfilling.

Speaker 2: Yeah, that that's such a a great retelling because it touches on several levels of fulfillment. Um I I I can appreciate the the feeling you get when you just are in these amazing places and watching people do such amazing things that that that alone can be fulfilling, but you're your point about um being able to inform the organization that the that the problem they reported, which is really just the symptom, uh is not actually what they should be focused on. I I Yes. I've had similar I think that's just such a uh a professionally fulfilling feeling that is um it's kind of special to the kinds of work that we do because we are going into the organization and we are looking at the work up close. And so when you can reflect back to the organization um that that they only have a, you know, a hint about what's really going on, that that can be professionally pretty fulfilling too.

Speaker 3: Yes, exactly. Yeah. And and have them accept that as well and broaden out the scope of investigation. Um that that was that was good too. You know, they they they saw what we were talking about.

Speaker 1: So Penny, you've worked in so many interesting areas. I I know you've done um some exciting work around um workplace interruptions, and I wondered if you'd just tell us a little bit about some of the um interesting things you're learning there.

Speaker 3: Yeah, thank you. Yeah. Um this has been a thread for us of for for quite a few years for over a decade now. Um I've done a lot of work in that area with some of my students and and I can tell you about some of that. Um started in the area because uh starting from about 2005, there was a huge upsurge of interest in the area of workplace interruptions. And it was really being driven by cognitive psychology theories, um of what happens cognitively when when you're doing a task and then you get diverted from it, distracted from it, you need to turn your attention to another task. Does that mean that you necessarily can pick up the original task um when the interruption has finished. And there's a lot of work that's been done in laboratory contexts that that shows that um people may take a long time to resume the task or they may resume the task at the wrong point, they may miss a step or they may repeat a step or they may not ever go back to the task at all, they forget what they were doing entirely and start something new. And so there was a lot of experimental work being done in the area. But in the healthcare area, we we had colleagues like Enrico Coyra here in Australia who who was a clinician himself, and he was looking at starting to look at interruptions as being a patient safety hazard in the healthcare area. And so they were doing a lot of work on that. And uh so we started doing work in the area. So the first work that I I did was with a PhD student at the time, Toby Gundiger. And uh we went into an intensive care unit at uh one of the local hospitals, and um Toby did some terrific field research looking at how intensive care unit nurses handle interruptions. And uh he was able to uh use eye tracking equipment with ICU nurses for the first few hours of their morning shift. And we went in um thinking along the lines that most of the time where healthcare workers are interrupted, they don't make errors. So um how how do they avoid making errors? What what are the secrets of of their success? Or what are the the the practices that they engage in that that mean that most of the time this is not a problem because we need to look at the success side of the story, not just sort of look at the the very tiny body of evidence that that there there might be dangers there. And uh so we we developed this whole approach that that we called distributed prospective memory. one of the the problems with interruptions is that you forget to do things that you plan to do. So there are failures of prospective memory and that's one of the the problems with interruptions. Um, but uh Toby knew from his observations that the the nurses would set things up in such a way that uh that they would not fail. So for example, um there's nice examples in the paper that that he wrote that came out in JEP applied. Um that the nurses, if they were halfway through drawing up a medication, when they got interrupted, they would hold the syringe or the ampule in their hand while they handled the interruption. So that when the interruption finished, they they'd look, what have I got in my hand? Oh, it's that syringe or ampule and I was halfway through that job. Or they would put post it up as reminders to do things and so on. So there was a lot of just natural behavior that that was preventing them from suffering the consequences of an interruption. And when and Toby was um looking at whether interruptions made it difficult for people to resume their tasks. And he was looking at one particular measure which was the resumption lag. So how long does it actually take you to resume the task that you were previously doing. But because of all this success that people had in getting back to their previous tasks, he he found that most of the time, well, a lot of the time, there was no resumption lag at all. They just got straight back to what they were doing. Um, so you know, the the the the logic, the resilience of the domain itself was preventing us from even observing what we what theory told us we should um observe. But there were quite a few occasions where there was a resumption lag, where there was a little bit of time before people went back to the original task after the interruption. And and Toby was able to show very elegantly that there were some factors like the length of the interruption and whether people change the context that they were in, um that actually did lengthen the interruption lag. So, but it only, it was a very small lag anyway, it was only a few seconds, and it was only extended by a few seconds. So here's the dilemma again about theory and practice, being in naturalistic environments versus um testing and exploring basic theories. Um when we did find the small subset of cases where there was a resumption lag, it um it conformed to some of the theories. We did find that the resumption lag was longer when theory told us it would be longer. But what was really interesting was all the cases where there wasn't a resumption lag, all the naturalistic practices that people engaged in to make them less prone to to um suffering from the consequences of the interruption. So, so um that that was a very interesting set of studies. Since then we we've um done further work. Tara Mcdi did a lot of work in in the same intensive care unit. And here we were looking at um interruptions not as a cognitive challenge to people, but as a systems challenge. So we following on um the work of Ed Hutchens about, you know, distributed cognition and so on, we said, well look the the whole intensive care unit is a system that has work where the work needs to interrupt itself to get itself done. So different people, different disciplines in the intensive care unit are agents of different functions that the intensive care unit needs to carry out. And so when we do work on interruptions, and there's a lot of field research out there, we can't just look at interruptions in nurses, or interruptions in doctors, or interruptions in respiratory therapists. We need to look at interruptions in everybody, every discipline that's there because including the the the secretarial and administrative staff, and the people that come in and out of the unit like respiratory therapists and pharmacists and so on, because they are all arms of the intensive care unit and they're all agents of the work that the system needs to to get its work done. And uh as a result, um Taro was able to do a much richer study looking at um who interrupt interrupts whom, and why they interrupt. And and she developed a a technique for sending two observers out, one to look at the interruptions and the other one where appropriate to follow up why interruptions were occurring. So following the people who had interrupted if it was appropriate, and saying, why was that needed right then? And uh were there any any alternatives to doing that? And and why had they evaporated at that point? And why did this um seem the obvious thing to do. So it was very much taking a systems approach um to to interruptions, which was a bit difficult, a bit different from what had been done in the past. So these are just some of the the the more field related work um that that we have done in interruption. So maybe just gives you a bit of a flavor of some of that work.

Speaker 1: Yeah, so uh so many things I like about this. So that first one, um where you were really looking at the strategies uh people use to be resilient to manage interruptions. Yeah. Um I feel like so often we ignore that. We're just just looking at the problem. So that is a really powerful study. Um and and your observation that the um even when the the interruptions created a lag, they had generally worked it out so it it didn't have a negative impact on the patient.

Speaker 3: That's right. And and it just illustrates that um the the theory is applicable, but its impact operationally in that context was pretty small actually compared with all these other strategies that that people were engaged in and compared with the time frames at which things that are significant actually happen in that domain. It was relatively small. So it was important theoretically, it it showed that the theories were robust, but when you put them in their operational context, there's so much more that that that you need to take into account in order to account for professional performance. So it it was both a success but very educational at the same time.

Speaker 1: Yeah. And then the second one, um the fact that you you uh you and and and Tara took it up a level and started thinking about the whole system as opposed to an individual role and looked at not just the consequences of the interruption, but what drove the interruption. Um that also is a a great perspective that I think lots of people talk about studying but finding a way to do that effectively is tricky. And um and this this strategy of following the interrupter and just understanding that is brilliant.

Speaker 3: Well, it it was um quite a difficult thing to execute. Um, we wrote a paper on that. Um, one of the the the outputs of Tara Mcdi's PhD and we called it the the dual perspectives method. So you have two perspectives, the perspective of the person who was interrupted and the perspective of the person who was interrupting. And uh a lot of previous research had just looked at one perspective or the other perspective. So both perspectives were represented in the literature, but there's pretty seldom that you're looking at both perspectives for the same event itself. And that what was what was uh novel about that work.

Speaker 1: Very nice. So then another area of your research that I'm really curious about is the work you've done about auditory displays and medical devices. So anyone that's been in a hospital setting, you know, those monitors and alarms are just part of the background. But you've done some really interesting research to kind of understand um the impact they have. Can you can you share some of your insights there?

Speaker 3: Yes. Oh, this has been quite a long thread in in our research, alongside other things. Um it all started when I was working at University of Illinois. I became very interested in the healthcare area and this is this was going back to about um the the early 1990s. Um so it was before the big uh Institute of Medicine report to air as human that came out in 99 2000. Um, so I became interested in the healthcare area and I actually volunteered at the local hospital in in the cardiovascular intensive care unit, and I worked there for about five hours a week for for two or three years just really embedding myself in that environment. And um the the uh cardiovascular intensive care unit had had a lot of patients who were pretty critical and uh that that had come out of the operating theater, the most of them had had um bypass surgery done. And um started doing some work in that area with Jakeiegel. And uh we observed some of the the operations and uh we noticed that the auditory alarms were were ever present and we wondered what's the role that that they're playing. And uh we wrote a a paper that came out in 2000 looking at how auditory alarms have different meanings in different contexts. And at that time uh Dave Woods had written a paper in in 1995 on the so-called alarm problem and saying and and it was really um prefiguring a lot of the current work that's been done on alarm fatigue in healthcare environments, saying that alarms have not been designed in a way that's really informative. Um they they come in very often cascades and floods at the wrong time just when you need to be focusing on an emerging problem but they're uninformative. And so uh as a result, we started taking a different approach saying, how can um auditory information uh be informative? How can it give you just a a background awareness of what's happening without demanding your attention? And uh so we started doing work on that and uh started work on this with Jake, and and then started work on it with uh Marcus Watson when when I moved to Australia. And we then became aware of a community of researchers called the International Community on Auditory Display or ICAAT, who look at techniques of auditory display such as Sonification. And Sonification is the expression of data relations or relationships between data, but turning that into sound. So expressing data relations in sound relations. And Marcus and I did a lot of work on what kind of information would be useful in the operator to maintain a continuous awareness of the patient's well-being without relying on alarms. But could this auditory information alert you to a patient deterioration so that you would be aware of it maybe before you needed to do anything, but you would be mentally prepared for it. And we noticed that there is a very effective auditory display in the operating theater and that of course is the pulse oximeter. Um, the pulse oximeter has a tone, it's the the beeping heart monitor basically. Um, but what's often not realized as as well as going beep, beep, beep, the tone also goes up and down in pitch depending on what the oxygen saturation of the patient is. And I always end up singing this, so excuse me, um, but if the oxygen saturation is going up towards 100%, it's going beep, beep, beep, beep, beep. And if it's decreasing, and that's bad, it's going beep, beep, beep, beep, beep. And that decrease in pitch will automatically attract the attention of the anesthestist. Anesthetists get very uncomfortable if they hear that sound. And so we thought there are other variables that anesthetist need to monitor. And on an investigation in accident reports and and discussions with an anesthesiologists and and so on, we realized that the the respiratory parameters of a patient, the the amount of carbon dioxide that they're breathing out and their their breathing depth and and the the the rate of breathing and so on. These are vital signs that actually can give information before the pulse oximeter does for certain kinds of deteriorations in a patient. And so we worked on how we could express those respiratory parameters in sound. And uh so after a lot of trial and error, we came up with a so-called respiratory sonification. And uh so we we developed that and we we tested it in simulators. And there are other people who are thinking about the same thing. Um Jake Siegel also developed a sonification for respiration and he did that with the Butch Lobe, who's an anesthesiologist, uh who also has a um a a strong side interest in human factors and we now actually do a lot of work with with Butch is one of our closest colleagues. And so we evaluated these ideas in lab studies and and then in a high-end simulator study, you know a high fidelity simulator. And um we're still hoping to be able to do a clinical trial. We have um with all the the usual permissions, tried it with consenting patients uh in the operating theater, and it has been shown to to be successful in that context and we hope to run a full clinical trial when we get the opportunity of doing that. But since then, we've actually made improvements to the heart monitor sound because that's not actually um necessarily the best sound that you could have. So we've done enhancements to that. Um many of my students have been working on that. So uh Kelly Hipheus, Astrolla Patterson, Ellen Madestick have been doing work on that, and that's some of our most most recent work. How can you make the pulse oximeter sound which has been tremendously successful already. How can you make it even better? And uh all of this work has been done in collaboration with with clinicians, and so some of our um collaborations there have been um most successful and most fruitful ones. So that that just gives you a little bit of an idea of some of the stuff that we have done with sonification in anesthesia environments and also in neonatal resuscitation environments. The neonatal resuscitation environments are pretty fascinating.

Speaker 1: I can imagine. Um so this is is very interesting to me. I I've never worked with auditory, but I've worked with visual displays and so one of the challenges there is there's sometimes lots of separate parameters and finding ways to kind of fuse them, uh so that people are seeing an integrated picture and not looking at, you know, seven different things and having to kind of fuse that information in their heads. And so I'm wondering is there as I think about this anastasis or anesthesiologist anesthetist, um and uh the different things this person's monitoring, do they each have a tone or is there a way that you're able to kind of merge those?

Speaker 3: That's that's a really important question Laura and it it's one that we um have striven for. Um, when we developed the sonification, the initial work that that uh for respiratory sonification with Marcus Watson, um we we had one experience with an anesthesiologist as we were developing it, that that made us think that we were on the right track. Um, this was an anesthesiologist in in Melbourne and uh we had been developing the sound and the sound was in its more mature configuration. So we invited this guy over, we we we showed him the simulation, we showed him the sound, showed him how it worked, played it for him and so on. And then um we just sort of broke off and we were having a conversation. But in the background, we were playing a scenario where there was a a simulated anesthesia incident. So something went wrong with the patient. Now, at that point in the conversation, we all had our backs to the computer, we had our backs to to the visual display showing what was happening. And halfway through our conversation, this introoperative event actually started. And um our colleague was talking, talking, talking about, you know, what happens in the operating theater, unrelated to to to what was going on in the scenario. But all of a sudden, he broke off and he said, what are you doing with the patient? Are you bleeding the patient? And that actually what it was what was happening. So the the the sounds that were coming from the scenario were associated with what would happen if a patient lost blood. And even though he had been talking, you know, his mouth and brain were moving, um in a conversation with us. He had been able to process in the background, not just that something was happening to to to to the entitle carbon dioxide, something was happening to the breathing rate and all these other symptoms. He was not thinking of each symptom, each vital sign separately. He'd been able to package the whole thing up and make a clinical determination of what was happening. You know, that you're bleeding the patient, which would then lead very much to what the next thing would be that he would do as an anesthesiologist and how he would advise the surgeon, you know, he would probably ask the surgeon to to to suspend uh operating at that point. So that made us think, hey, people are really processing these sounds as an integrated whole, not in their parts but as an integrated whole. And that was really important for us in in making us think that that we had um that the sounds were were number one, working pretentively, so they didn't require focal attention to to to work. And secondly that they could be interpreted at as a high level of abstraction in terms of what they meant clinically, not just in terms of what the individual vital signs, what their status was. So, does that answer your question?

Speaker 1: Absolutely, that is fascinating.

Speaker 3: Since then, um we've looked at the relationship between the pulse oximeter and the respiratory sonification. One thing that we haven't done yet is to look at how our enhancements to the pulse oximeter would work with the respiratory sonification. Um because I'll just a little bit about the pulse oximeter and some of the more recent work if you don't mind, if you've got a moment. Um, the pulse oximeter, particularly in neonatal resuscitation environments, um is a very important tool. But for premature neonates, you've got to be sure that they don't get too much oxygen in. So if you're giving them supplemental oxygen, you've got to be very careful that you don't actually take them up to 98, 99, 100% oxygen saturation because it can mean that they get a pathology that can last a lifetime. They can get blindness for example, they could be blind or they there's a damage to to the lung tissue. So, um when the pulse oximeter sound goes up, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, that might actually be bad for certain classes of patients like premature babies. And so you need to indicate when you're getting to a point where it's getting too high and you also need to indicate when you're getting to a point where it's too low as well because that's incompatible with life as they like to say. So, um we've done various experiments about where you add acoustic enhancements when things are getting too high or getting too low. So for example, you can add tremolo to the sound. And this is a bit difficult to sing, but I'll give it a go. Um so you can go So you're adding a trembling sound which is instantly recognizable but you're still hearing that the sound is going up, but it's saying, hey, I'm in a zone um where I'm not meant to be for this particular patient. So we've but those are enhancements that we've added to the pulse oximeter sound. And the pulse oximeter sound operates in a different acoustic space, a different part of the the sound landscape if you like, from the sort of sounds that we have for a respiratory sound, a respiratory sonification. And uh one thing that we would really love to do is to play them all together and see how it works as a kind of a symphony and whether when you put those sounds together, whether it works in a pre-attentive way. So there's a whole lot more that needs to be done in that area. So people go out there and do it and we're happy to help you.

Speaker 2: Great. Now that's really fascinating stuff. Um and, you know, I think we can all imagine the applications because, you know, even just day-to-day, we all pay attention to these sorts of things. Um so, so Penny, your international work is is well known and uh and you already listed a number of folks that you've worked with. So, um folks know a lot about you and your work. I'm wondering if you could tell us one thing about you that our audience probably doesn't know.

Speaker 3: One thing that the audience doesn't know. Um, well, uh, let me see, think thing, okay, I I can tell you things that are unrelated to my professional life.

Speaker 2: Let's hear it.

Speaker 3: Okay, right. We already know you can sing, so uh so don't count that. Kind of, yeah, you don't know. So, um, no. Don't don't don't test me too hard on that one. Uh, well, there are things that are known locally, but maybe not generally. Um, one of them that that um with COVID and lockdown and so on that that I've been um revamping is that I make cocktails. Um, many years ago in in the 1970s, um, I did a cocktail making course um in in the summer vacation from university. So it was a three-week training course, um, where we learned to make a 50 different cocktails and then at the end of it, we were tested on our ability to make those 50 cocktails under high speed, to spike the keg at the same time, and to change the paper roll in the till while our instructor was throwing orders at us. And uh that's been a lot of fun actually ever since, being able to make cocktails in the very traditional 1940s, 1950s style. So its relevance to um the pandemic and the lockdowns and so on is that um, um, the first few weeks of the lockdown, uh, my students said some of my students said, teach us to make cocktails. And so we had these webinars if you like, um where I I would be sitting at my little bar or standing at my little bar and we would make different kinds of cocktails and and the students would follow on at home. And uh so we made sour cocktails one week, we made aromatic cocktails another, we made Christmas cocktails and so on. Um, so yes, that that's been a very um useful social skill shall we say and um, I've been very happy to teach people cocktail making as well as human factors and cognitive engineering over the years. So that's something that's known locally, but maybe not generally.

Speaker 2: That is my favorite answer to that question in this entire podcast series.

Speaker 3: I I'll teach you too, you know.

Speaker 2: I would like to.

Speaker 3: Yeah.

Speaker 2: Actually I I started the masterclass version of uh cocktail making, but I haven't finished it yet. So now I know I can talk to you.

Speaker 3: Okay. Well, I have course notes. I can send you the course notes.

Speaker 2: Well, so the thing that I was most struck by was you've got to buy all this stuff up front, right? If you really want to make fancy cocktails, you got to have a a fairly robust set of materials to start with.

Speaker 3: You do, yes. and you you need to make liquid sugar. And it needs to be um quite concentrated liquid sugar to make really successful cocktails. So um, anyway, I'm giving away some of the trade secrets here. But it it it can get expensive, but but if if you limit yourself to certain classes of cocktails, you can get away with um just a a few types of cocktails. So for example, if you start with sours, you you'll be, you know, get away with fairly simple stuff. But those are the reason. Yeah.

Speaker 2: So you you get it it's gets very complicated quickly. Another connection that I have to this is a couple years ago I was doing some expertise management uh pilot work uh with a company that was essentially trying to take the, you know, the the K cup model of coffee into the cocktail world. So they were developing little pods basically for cocktails and I quickly realized how complex it gets.

Speaker 3: Yes, yeah, yeah. Well, um, there there's a very classic book um called the art of mixing drinks by David Emberry that was written in the 1940s. And um my instructor had worked in the Caribbean in various resorts. He had actually made cocktails for for Frank Sinatra and people like that. And he did it that classic David Emberry style. So that's the style that I learned. Which is doing it very much from fresh ingredients rather than pods.

Speaker 2: Right.

Speaker 3: So there you are, everybody. That's cocktails.

Speaker 1: That's awesome. Okay, so I have another fun question for you. I want to ask you to tell us two truths about yourself and one lie and Brian and I will try to guess which is the lie. Okay. Here's one. I have run in a half marathon charity run and I won it. Okay, is that that's the first one. Second one, before I started psychology, I got a degree in art history from the University of Melbourne. And the third one, I love I love to cook Vietnamese food.

Speaker 4: Hmm.

Speaker 1: Are you going to go first Brian or should I?

Speaker 2: I'm not going first.

Speaker 1: Okay, this is hard. I think that you um did not do a degree in art history.

Speaker 2: And I think you did not win the half marathon. That's an extremely difficult thing to do. Not that you couldn't, but it's just really hard.

Speaker 3: Are you done?

Speaker 2: I we're done. Those are our guesses for the lie.

Speaker 3: I've been really cruel to you guys. They're all lies.

Speaker 4: Oh.

Speaker 3: Well played, ma'am. I'm sorry about that. That's hilarious.

Speaker 3: They're they're actually all half truths at the same time. Yeah. Because I I did run in a half marathon charity fun run and I did do run do a subject in art history at University of Melbourne. And I do like to cook feasts of other kind of food. Um and that that has actually been I've I've relearned how to cook since uh COVID. Um so they are half truths. So unfortunately there's no way that you could win. I'm so sorry. That was cruel of me.

Speaker 1: Well, this has been so much fun, Penny. Thank you for speaking with us today.

Speaker 3: Well, thank you both Laura and Brian for um for for for inviting me on. Uh I think it's a great initiative and um, I'm I'll give you some links to some of the work that I've talked about and happy to follow up with anybody who is interested in following up with us on anything that we do.

Speaker 1: Wonderful. Well on that note, thank you for joining us for the NDM podcast. I'm Laura Malotello.

Speaker 2: And I'm Brian Moon. Learn more about Naturalistic decision making and where to follow us by visiting Naturalisticdecisionmaking.org.

Speaker 1: (music)