The Naturalistic Decision Making podcast with Brian Moon and Laura Millattello. This podcast series brings you interviews with leading NDM researchers who study and support people who make decisions under stress.

Speaker 1: Welcome to the Naturalistic Decision Making podcast. This is Brian Moon from Parian Technologies.

Speaker 2: And I'm Laura Milattello from Applied Decision Science.

Speaker 1: We're pleased to be talking today with Gary L Klein. Gary received his BA in psychology and his PhD in cognitive social psychology. He is a senior principal scientist in cognitive Science and artificial intelligence at the Miderr Corporation, where he has worked for nearly 30 years focusing primarily on how people acquire and use information in domains including emergency response, air traffic management, and intelligence analysis. He has led projects about using forecasting models that generate graphical depictions of decision spaces to improve decision makers's option awareness under deep uncertainty, designing a collaborative option awareness for joint action or co-action process to provide emergency responders with something beyond situation awareness, and generated a framework for evaluating collaboration. In 2015, Gary and Miterr served as hosts for the 12th International NDM Conference. Welcome Gary, and thank you very much for joining us.

Speaker 3: Thank you for having me.

Speaker 1: Great. So Gary, uh I want to ask you uh and I'm kind of making an assumption here but I think it's true, uh as a as a sort of classically trained cognitive and social psychologist, uh tell us how you got engaged with and and have been engaged with NDM over the years.

Speaker 3: Um so I've always been, even before I knew the term naturalistic decision making, um it's been my inclination to focus on uh decision making in natural environments. So even when I did my dissertation, which was on heuristic influence on decision making, uh my focus was on the fact that um much of the literature at that time, um and this was back in the 1980s, oh so long ago, um that um they were conducted in laboratories and the the um in in uh environments that were um very simplistic. and uh did not provide people with anything like um the normal context they'd get when doing decision making. So if you're looking at outcome feedback on how people make decisions and their confidence in decisions over time, when all they have is outcome feedback and they have no context for the decision making um itself, no um elaborate scenario that uh provides them with some other basis for uh determining whether um um advice or analysis is correct or not. Um, that might lead to out that might lead to results that are really not really representative of the way things work in the real world. So even back then, um, in my dissertation, I tried to my my work um involved providing a more elaborate kind of uh scenario engagement uh for the participants in the experiment that would um give them um additional basis for the information that they were getting and and uh might influence the way they used it. And it turns out they did. It turns out that uh I was able to construct environments where the uh analysis people received uh were counter intuitive and others where they were not. And um, they um responded to outcome feedback very differently when they were in a counter intuitive kind of environment than when they were in a unconflicted one, for example. And uh so that was uh um um 40 some years ago. Um, and uh more recently, um, uh I came in contact, I think the first time was um around 2004 or so that we met. Um, um, at a at a meeting uh downtown Washington DC in uh conference room about uh software tools and so forth. Um, that was the first time and the first actual NDM conference I remember attending was in 2011 and I had the, um, um uh Hutba as we say, to present a paper on providing what I called an option awareness basis for naturalistic decision making. And, um, our focus on option awareness was to go beyond situation awareness as Mica Ensley had described it, um, to to illustrate how in complicated environments, either due to uncertainty or the multitude of factors involved, uh people needed um help with understanding how all those factors came together and played out over some range of plausible futures in order to be able to compare adequately compare one option with another, um, adequately discriminate what factors led to better versus worse outcomes and ultimately to be able to create uh new options. And we showed how this was an extension of uh a lot of the work at that time that had been that that was being done in naturalistic decision making.

Speaker 1: Great. So there's a lot there. Um I I do want to get back to the uh uh option uh awareness space, but uh I want to kind of go back and and you kind of mentioned, you know, you're doing your dissertation and uh and you sort of realized that the the the paradigm if you will at the time was was was fairly simplistic Yes. tasks and context. I I'm just wondering if uh if there was sort of any insight that you had back then or or was it uh, you know, someone's guidance that that offered that alternative view or uh or did you did you sort of figure it out on your own that the the the simplistic approach was just not going to work?

Speaker 3: That's a good question. Um, it it really came from my own, um, um, applied orientation. Um, I was, um, never really all that interested in in totally basic, um, research and psychology. Even being a cognitive social psychologist, which is all about how people situate themselves in the world, um, how they see the world, um, how they think the world sees them, um, is a more of a an applied, uh, kind of psychology than than other forms of uh experimental psychology. And so, um, I, um, had always been interested in, um, in uh kind of that applied aspect of things. Um, and so when I looked at the at the research that had been done out there and realized, um, how these environments had, um, often times very little eco ecological validity. I, uh, really thought that, uh, I needed to demonstrate how that, uh, interacted with, um, with some of the more typical way, um, experimental manipulations that we did.

Speaker 1: So it it it grew if you will out of out of sort of your looking at the the basic research paradigm in terms of running experiment in the lab and and just not fitting with what you wanted to accomplish with the research.

Speaker 3: Yes, but, um, you know, I didn't, you would think that would drive me to doing field experiments. And yet, I I I've always liked, um, um, uh, tried for a kind of intermediate type of, uh, situation, uh, wanting the control that the laboratory gives you, but trying to provide an environment, uh, for research, um, that is more ecologically valid, that has the right elements of the real world in it, um, so that, um, it it be it is something that can be generalizable and applied in the real world.

Speaker 1: Right. And so you've it seems like you've sort of walked a fine line there. Uh have you have you um as you sort of think back over your work would, uh, did you ever sort of feel like one side was was sort of drawing you in, uh, more than the other or or were you always looking for that sort of middle road and uh and trying to satisfy sort of the take advantage of both of the approaches.

Speaker 3: I've always been, uh, walking this this middle road. Um, always with an ultimate focus on the applied, but, um, in, uh, trying to, like I said, um, take advantage of the the more structure and control that that, uh, you can get in in the laboratory. And, you know, now nowadays we have, um, simulations, even artificial reality, um, that we can use that uh provides quite a bit of the of the reality, um, and the factors in the real world, um, while still being able to maintain, uh, more of a control over the experimental elements. And that's always intrigued me. When I when I first, um, when I left after my dissertation, um, again, I was interested in, uh, application and one of my first, uh, major jobs was, um, not in decision making actually, but in uh, education. And, uh, my interest was in applying what I had known about cognitive social psychology and the way people learn, the way people uh, make decisions, um, to using computers, uh, for improving instruction. And, um, I did that for about eight years. Uh, that was before I came to the Mideter Corporation.

Speaker 1: I didn't know that. This is news.

Speaker 3: Yep.

Speaker 1: Uh, so what what kind of role was that?

Speaker 3: I was the, um, um, director of educational computing for the seven Community Colleges of Dallas County, Texas. And when I started out there, um, the only use of computers they were using was for teaching computer programming. Um, and even that was using, um, terminals, um, at the local Community colleges connected to a main frame, um, that was at uh, one of the centers, one of the main uh, technology centers, um, in support of the schools. And, uh, they brought me in to try and figure out how they could do better than that. And by the time I left, we were using, um, computers in, um, English departments for teaching writing, um, in the math departments, in the art department, um, they, uh, were big resistors in the beginning, but when they began to realize and I showed them how they could do graphic arts with computers, they went crazy. Um, and so that was a big adoption of their. So we were using it, uh, pretty much across the, um, entire spectrum. And in fact, we built a artificially intelligent intake system that would allow, um, students when they were registering for classes to fill out a bubble form and, uh, having read the bubble form, we could then, um, suggest to them all kinds of support systems and agent in and uh, uh, departments uh within the community colleges, um, that could help them, um, um, with their learning. Uh, help them do better, um, everything from, um, financial assistance to, uh, child care assistance, to all the kinds of assistance, um, that, uh, the community colleges provided.

Speaker 1: 30 years later, they're still trying to figure out how to do that, I think.

Speaker 3: Yes, yes. Um, community colleges did a good job, um, actually in, uh, actually helping people succeed at college. Um, more so than your uh four-year schools do.

Speaker 1: So, so you went from there then directly to Mideter? Is that the path?

Speaker 3: I did. Um, I did go from there to Mideter. Um,

Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, so, so tell us a bit about Mideter just sort of generally, uh, this concept of the FFRDC and and how Mideter works and then kind of the roles that you've that that Mideter plays in the world, and also the ones that you've played at Mideter.

Speaker 3: So, you know, talking about this in between this, uh, Mideter plays this kind of in between role, too. Um, we like to talk about it as a neutral broker. Um, and it, um, um, fills in this role somewhat between, um, academia, um, and industry and the, uh, government. Um, and what it try what we do at Mideter is we try to bring our expertise to bear, um, to help the government, um, acquire and use, um, sophisticated technology, uh, for, uh, doing their job. Um, started out a long time ago looking at, uh, radars and, uh, um, being able to help help the, uh, uh, Department of Defense, um, use, uh, defensive radars. Um, and now we, um, are, um, I think we have seven FFRDCs and we support, uh, health and human services, we still support the Department of Defense, we support the Federal Aviation Administration. Um, so we, we, uh, run the gamut, um, in, uh, the the things that we do for the government.

Speaker 1: And how about you? How about what what sort of roles have you had there?

Speaker 3: So, uh, I joined, um, early on a, uh, technology center at Mideter, um, which is, uh, focuses on, um, providing experts to the rest of Mideter, technical experts to the rest of the Mideter, uh, to help, um, all these different organizations which have direct connections to the government, um, um, provide, uh, technical information and, uh, uh, in their work. And, uh, so many of those organizations have, um, domain experts, so if you're working for the FAA, these are people who know a lot about air traffic control. If you're working for the DOD, they know a lot about the military, but, uh, they may not have any deep knowledge of cognitive social psychology or cognitive systems engineering, um, machine learning, um, and, uh, data management. Um, all of these are kind of kinds of things that the tech centers have experts in, and flexibly can supply those to the rest of Mideter. And so, um, in the Tech Center, um, I've worked for, um, virtually all of the FFRDCs at one time or another, um, applying these ideas about decision making and option awareness to a wide variety of, um, of applications.

Speaker 2: So Gary, I wanted to ask, I know you in your work have thought about, um, cognitive performance both at the individual level and the collaborative level, and many people just study one or the other, or teams or individuals. And so I wondered if you could, uh, maybe give us an example and kind of explain the the value of really looking at both levels.

Speaker 3: So there a lot of our sponsors, um, the work is is, um, that the that their operators do or they're the the people who say that. Um, where the rubber meets the road. Um, there is a there is a individual level and a team level and a broader organizational level, um, um, that has to be that that all have to have some degree of of option awareness. Now I see everything in terms of option awareness now that we coined that term. Um, but the, um, so for example, with, um, air traffic control, there are individual air traffic controllers that are responsible for ensuring, um, aircraft safety and ensuring that there are no conflicts between aircraft in a particular piece of the airspace. Um, and, uh, they then, uh, and and so they have an individual job to do, um, and their decision making has to be supported at that individual level, uh, for them to be able to, uh, maintain that level of safety. But very quickly they have to hand off those aircraft from their space to the space being controlled by the person next to them, um, who's controlling the next space over. And all of these spaces, by the way, are really cognitively constructed because they're constructed to make, um, the job that that individual has to do, uh, cognitively tractable, that they can actually maintain, um, the safety amongst the aircraft in their space by keeping that space not too complicated, but not so simple that it impacts, um, the, uh, movement of aircraft. In any case, um, they quickly have to hand that, uh, those aircraft that leave their space off to the person in the next space. So they have to understand what that next person needs in order to be able to manage their space as well. And these spaces then get get added together, they become a a whole, um, the sectors come together and and and become a whole region, um, and then there are people who manage that region at this next level up. Um, they've got to, uh, but instead of focusing on individual aircraft, they're now focusing on flows of aircraft and they're called the uh, uh, air traffic flow manager. Um, and then those regions get all ultimately into a uh, agglomerated into an entire center and those centers add up to the entire air space over the United States. Um, you can see a similar kind of situation in the military as well, where you go from the individual soldier to a platoon, to a brigade, to a battalion and on up and each of those is being those levels is being uh managed, um, at a, um, different level of abstraction. And the information has to flow from the lowest level of abstraction of the individual soldier, all the way up to, um, let's say the the a core level, um, where that person has to make sense of a broader area over a broader period of time, um, with all the information that bubbles up from those soldiers down below. And it's not simply adding it all up, it's a matter of translating and transforming that information from one decision making, um, level of abstraction to another level of abstraction. Um, this has fascinated me, um, um, since the very beginning of my work and it is, um, one of the the the areas, this movement of information from one level to another, from one person to another is a a place where translation and errors often occur. Um, and, um, it is also a place where there is a lot of of cognitive labor that's needed in order to be able to do those transformations and translations. And so my work, um, um, has always been focused on using computers and automation to try and help with that process, uh, both for the individual and then as that information moves from one individual to another and then to the larger group.

Speaker 2: So this is so interesting. I have not worked in the space you're describing, but it makes me think of some other, um, work I'm doing, um, in health care, where we now have these pervasive electronic health records. And so a clinician, um, in the old days might walk down the hall or make a phone call, but now they can put this into the health record and kind of tag someone else so that it will show up as an alert for them. And one of the things they're finding is that just because you put it in the record, that's not the same as communicating it. You don't really know if that other person received it, if they had a question, it's not easy to get back to them. And so I'm just wondering if you're you're exploring similar issues that that that just documenting something in a computer is not the same as actually communicating it.

Speaker 3: Yes, um, I have. Um, not on electronic health records, although Mideter is doing a lot of work on electronic health records and finding the problems that you have just described. Also that, um, just like in the in the organizations I described, um, people at one level in the organization, they need different information from that health record than people at another level of an in the organization. So the individual nurse or doctor that's attending to the individual patient, um, it's important for them to have a certain kind of information and the the, um, doctor who is, uh, running that that particular part of the of the hospital, uh, may need not just again, aggregate information, but a transformer of that information that allows them to understand the options that they have, uh, for supporting, um, the activities going on down at the individual level. Um, this this work that we did on, uh, collaborative framework that we did, it called the collaborative evaluation framework, um, uh, focused on, um, the, um, collaborative behaviors that are needed, if you will, that allow us to do what you're talking about, which is to actually, um, um, communicate, uh, better, um, between us. Um, and many of our systems that we call collaborative systems don't actually accomplish some of those behaviors. So one of those behaviors is alerting. Um, how do I get the attention of somebody that I've got something important to say to them? And then how do I convey that information to them, uh, once they're alerted? Um, um, how do I know, um, one is is simply, um, um, identification. How do I know who to send the information to? Who's supposed to receive this information? Um, I know that, uh, in the and this was years ago, um, that when, um, um, I, uh, my daughter was actually in the hospital and we noted how, um, information had to be moved from one, uh, system to another. And again, that's where errors tend to happen. So, you know, you want to prescribe a particular drug, then you have to take it, you have to go, the nurse had to take that information and put it into the pharmacy system and then the pharmacy system had to produce the drug. It just was very, uh, um, lent itself to a lot of errors. And so the, um, I'm I'm hoping that the electronic health records are going to help us do a better job of that, but as you're saying again, um, information is different information is needed by different people at different levels, and different jobs within the organization. And all of that's something somehow has to be triggered by the information we put into electronic health record. That translation and transformation can be done by artificial intelligence sometimes, but often times it has to be done by people and you have to provide them with the means for doing it.

Speaker 2: Definitely. And I was kind of circling back to the things you were talking about in terms of of cognitive fidelity or realism, uh in the design process. If you just focus on the most routine kinds of conversation, it's maybe easy enough to develop a system that that supports humans in communicating, um, but but it's all those corner cases when something weird happens, that's where those systems fall down.

Speaker 3: Often times that's true. But often times, um, there there is a failure to understand this need for translation and transformation. And often times what we get is simply aggregation of the information from down below to um the next level up. I remember in a situation um with the military, um we were discussing with people, um, you know, those that are working, um, in military communications, and down on the front line, they're trying to keep the, um, the computer servers up and running and they can tell you, you know, um, the likelihood of failure of this particular computer system and what the probability will be that it'll be online, etc, etc. And often times so up the general gets this information saying, you know, we we can guarantee you a 90% um up time. But the general doesn't care about that. The general cares about when I've got this particular um, platoon headed to this particular location, are they going to be able to maintain communications or not at this time in this place. And um, so this this this um communications oriented information, the about the computer and whether the computer is up or down doesn't matter to the general. Is there another computer that's going to be able to compensate for this one when it's down? I need to know are those guys at that time going to be able to communicate. That's what I'm interested in. And so there has to be a translation that goes on um in order for them to make a decision at their level.

Speaker 2: Yeah, very interesting. This is such an important perspective.

Speaker 1: So Gary, you've mentioned uh a couple of frameworks already. You mentioned uh the that I mentioned the co-action framework that you uh came up with and and you mentioned that we first met in around 2004 when we were trying to come up with kind of a a big framework for how do you evaluate the effects of software tools on individuals and and teams working in the area of intelligence analysis, which has many of the challenges that that we've already been talking about here. Um, but I I'm I'm interested in sort of your your history of kind of developing these big frameworks and and sort of putting out these uh abstracted understandings of a domain so that people who are developing tools and developing other kinds of solutions can consider uh how effective they're being or perhaps even in the design stage how effective they might be by sort of looking at these uh frameworks that tell us about how work uh needs to be accomplished in these different different domains. And I'm just kind of curious to get your perspective on on these the frameworks you put out, the processes, where have you seen these kinds of things take hold, that is, you know, people start to pick them up and use them in different ways, uh or even, you know, where have they met resistance and so people might push back either on the framework itself or even just on the idea of kind of using a this abstracted framework approach. Where where have you seen it take hold and and and or meet resistance?

Speaker 3: Conceptually, it's taken hold often times when we um explain it to people, these actual decision makers in the field, they go, yeah, that's exactly what I want. Um, I want something that does that kind of thing. Um, for example, um, one of the in in the co-action process, um, one of the things that we were looking at is the fact that, um, um, there can be individual decision spaces and there can be a synergistic decision space between two different individual organizations. Um, in the emergency response, for example, um, the police can have their decision space, which, um, provides them with an evaluative, um, uh, outcome, um, as to how their action is going to, um, affect the environment in ways that are important to them. So, um, safety, for example, is very important to the police and so if they're going to go and direct traffic at a particular location, they're there in order to make sure that they're to reduce the likelihood that there's going to be accidents, um, in a very high traffic area. Um, the fire department on the other hand, that's not a big interest to them. They're interested in putting out fires, but they're also interested in getting their fire trucks to the fire as quickly as possible. Uh, any delay in getting the fire uh fire truck to a fire allows the fire to grow bigger and requires more fire trucks and more resources to be sent. Of course, it allows it to do more damage while they're being delayed as well. Um, so now where do these two come together? Um, if the if there's a traffic situation between the the firehouse and the fire, um, the fire, uh, hole itself, um, the fire chief is going to be figuring, I'm going to have my fire trucks delayed through that traffic, I better send more fire trucks than otherwise would be the case if I had done it so at 2:00 a.m. in the morning when there was no traffic at all. Um, the police on the other hand are looking at that same situation and going, you know, we've got these guys, uh, that are exiting the football game. We need to send one or two, uh, police cars out there. In order to not necessarily reduce the level of traffic, but to make sure that that the passage of traffic is safe. Now, the interaction between these two falls into this synergistic space because the fire chief has a traffic constraint. He's having to send more trucks because there is this traffic constraining the movement of his trucks to the fire. The police now have a have a capability to actually reduce the traffic lower than they otherwise would need for safety in order to let those fire trucks through more quickly, get to the fire more quickly, and therefore require less fire trucks to be sent, leave more fire trucks in reserve and also put out the fire more quickly so it does less damage. Neither one of them looking at their individual decision spaces recognizes this synergy. They're only looking at the um evaluating their decisions from their own perspective. But when you put the two decision spaces together now into a synergistic space, we realize that if the police simply sent one more fire one more police car to that traffic, um, situation, wouldn't do anything for safety, but what it does for reducing traffic allows the fire trucks to send fewer fire fewer fire trucks quicker to the fire and for the overall city results in a better situation. And so we've been looking at this and uh one of the first uh presentations we made on our work, um, was um, with regard to this uh synergistic uh decision making, um, at the Iscram and uh information systems for crisis response and management conference. Um, and uh the point of this was that when you when you gave them just their individual decisions spaces, they didn't make very good decisions whatsoever in getting those fires out. When you gave them the synergistic decisions space by itself, they made really good decisions with regard to putting those fires out. When you gave them all both of them together, the individualistic and the synergistic together, they just got confused. So, how you present this information and how much information you present is really important in order to be able to uh facilitate, um, effective and quick uh decision making.

Speaker 1: Right. So, so you really you're sort of describing the opportunities uh and the constraints and you sort of started off uh also saying that sometimes these these frameworks and just descriptions of the processes themselves can be useful to whoever's whoever's trying to take action, whoever's trying to come up with a solution. Um, which is really quite interesting because, you know, often the the the goal of any uh project uh is to sort of come up with a solution and and and what you're suggesting is is that a solution can just be a description of what's actually happening and then others can sort of orient themselves.

Speaker 3: And understanding um how different people are under have different comprehensions, different understanding of what's happening. There was work by Winston Seek called cognitive culture. And we have uh developed, um, a process based on partly on what Winston had done. Um, Winston's work had to do with, um, um, uh extracting uh mental models, causal mental models from individuals, um, on how they thought the world worked or how they thought some process worked. Um, with the idea that, um, there were groups of people, um, that had different ideas, different models for how the world worked, and, um, how those models actually got distributed amongst people, uh, was not always obvious. So, uh, when he was looking at tribes, I believe, um, in uh, Southwest Asia, um, he was finding that, you know, the whole tribe doesn't have the same mental model of how things work. Um, and some members of this tribe have the same mental models as members of another tribe over there, but not the same as other members of their own tribe over here. Um, and so, um, what we find is that, um, when you have these different mental models about how things work, um, you evaluate the information very differently from each other about what's important and what's not important, your priorities are different. One of the things we're looking at is has been in terms of revealing, um, others meant other people's mental models to you, so that you understand how they're looking at the world and how it differs from the way you're looking at the world in order to facilitate better communication and better joint decision making.

Speaker 1: So you're sort of extending that work then into Yeah.

Speaker 3: We have. That work and the the approach it took of of building directed graphs of uh people's causal mental models, um, we have um applied some um other work done by Osa Bryson, um, in, um, being able to assess those graphs, um, and being able to assign, uh, quantitative values to the edges in the graphs, um, and in so doing, being able to turn those graphs, um, into uh computational simulations. Um, what's more, uh, we added to that work, um, work done in crowd sourcing, um, and, um, and, uh, assessment, uh, to enable us to crowd source a graph, uh, to a set of experts, um, they may be experts in different domains as a matter of fact, to allow for different kinds of evaluations. Um, and, uh, to uh, do this in a in a way that we get a low bias estimate for all the edges in the graphs with a actually a subset of the of of comparisons, which is also defined by OC Bryson, um, in a set of rules. And in doing this, we call the process DCIM for descriptive to to uh to simulation, descriptive to simulation modeling, uh, uh process. Um, this allows us to, uh, take what starts out as a, uh, qualitative model, um, in a form that can be easily understood, uh, by, um, decision makers, by people. Um, and there's research to show that by Robert Hoffman and Gary A Klein. Um, and to take that model and then turn it into a computational model that allows us to engage in exploratory modeling with that model, work based on work done by Chandra Sekaran and uh Steve Banky. And, um, thereby generating a decision space using that model, um, that is based on all the the the individual's understanding of how the world works. So now we have, if you believe the world works like this, we can use that and uh take those assumptions and uh manipulate some of them here and there in order to do some experimentation and show you what the implications for your understanding of the world. Um, and that leads to this, uh, to one level of uh option awareness, uh, and allowing us to then take uh various options that you have at your disposal, run them through this, um, operationalize them in the model by assigning different values to different parts of the model and then allow you to be able to see how they compare with each other based on your own understanding about how the world works. We can do this very, very quickly as it turns out, which um, you know, normally simulation modeling can take weeks or months to do, we can do this in hours or days.

Speaker 1: Right. So I I've always sort of looked at you as as someone who's always kind of on the lookout for ways to take qualitative findings and models and quantify them, uh, in order to do other things with them, whether that's, you know, to evaluate or to uh to to learn some additional insights. that seems to be another one of these uh fine lines that you've always done a great job balancing on Right. Um because you I think you're you're you're someone who's who's able on the quantitative side but also sees the the value of the insights that come with the qualitative pieces.

Speaker 3: Yes, yes. I mean, some of the things that we can see, for example, when we have a group evaluate these models is that, um, the relationship between two nodes in the model, some may value it highly saying, yes, A affects it greatly affects B. Um, others may, um, that have valueate that model may say, no, I don't think that that is uh, that A affects B, um, very much at all, or certainly not in the way that you've you've got it in the model and some may come in out in between. So you you get this multi-modal distribution of of belief, uh, in the strength of that, um, relationship. And that in and of itself, even if we don't run the model, if we if we don't actually run the simulation, but simply look at this cross tabulation of of evaluations, uh, reveals a lot of interesting information. What is the difference between those three groups of people who who have these three different, um, assessments of this particular relationship in the model? Um, and, um, uh, we've had some, uh, applications of this approach where that's as far as we've gone and that has allowed people to, again, search for, um, solutions, um, options, um, that, um, satisfy, um, the different groups that have these different opinions of, uh, what that relationship is. Or to recognize that nothing that they can do is going to satisfy everyone and now they understand why because no everyone doesn't understand the world the same way.

Speaker 2: So, Gary, I'm going to switch gears a little bit. You are part of a, um, sort of elite group of folks who have actually organized an NDM meeting. There there aren't many of us in the world. Um and so I'm just wondering what were some of the highlights from from hosting that meeting in it in uh the the NDM 12 meeting?

Speaker 3: Well, the, the, the exchange of ideas, uh, and the breadth of ideas that we have in our MDM community is incredible. Um, the different applications from sports to intelligence, to just everything under the sun that involves decision making. Um, uh, we get presented there. And, um, just meeting all those people and having all those discussions, um, was not just great for me, but I'm sure great for everybody that comes there and that's why we get the turnout that we get for these meetings. So that was just, that was wonderful. That's always been wonderful part of the part of the uh conferences that we've had. And uh we tried to provide opportunities as we could to, um, enhance that, um, uh time for people just to get together and talk, um, not merely to um sit and um, um, listen to um papers being presented. Um, and we included tutorials. Um, at the end, we um my partner, one of my partners and I presented a half-day tutorial on option awareness and uh how you measure it and how you construct decision spaces and so forth. Um, that was really fun to we were very interested. Um, and uh we had uh um time for food and talk and wine, um, that also provide that kind of level of interaction. So, um, yeah, that was it's it was always been an exciting part to participate, um, in the conferences, um, for that reason, and it was uh the challenge and uh interesting to provide the opportunities at our own conference.

Speaker 2: Yeah, so, so everything you're saying resonates with me. These are the things I love about these meetings too. And I think one of the cool things about organizing an NDM meeting is knowing that you kind of have the flexibility uh to um to be creative, right? It's it's not like a a a meeting with a society and you know, they're a bunch of academic people that need to get certain criteria, um, you know, to to get tenure. I mean, part of it can help you there, but but, you know, you were talking about these half-day workshops and opportunity to just talk and eat and interact, um, that's one of the things I have really enjoyed is in being on the organizing committee. It's just, you know, kind of thinking outside the box. What what would make this a great a great experience for everyone?

Speaker 3: Yes. Yes, and and, um, uh, getting people from different disciplines together so that, you know, ideas about how something is done in in a discipline that you've never thought of in your particular situation, uh, might, um, um, trigger, um, some ideas and some applications for your particular work. Um, I was I really love the way in which, um, um, analysis and measurements were done, um, with regard to the application of NDM in sports, um, which is real-time, very fast, um, and, um, and and that's led to some thinking on our part, you know, about how we would do the same thing with regard to, um, um, applications in air traffic control or military or whatever, where also we've got real-time, um, very fast thinking going on and and how do we conduct measurements in those areas that'll give us some insight into what's happening. So that cross pollination is just really exciting at these conferences.

Speaker 2: Yeah, I would agree. The other place I see that, um, those methods from the sports, uh, applications, uh, now are kind of morphing into law enforcement, that kind of very rapid decision making, and and the methods folks are using in sports are are now finding their way over to law enforcement. So, yeah, I I agree. That that cross pollination is is really cool.

Speaker 3: Yeah.

Speaker 2: Um, so let me ask, um, if you had to name three people who have really influenced your approach over the course of your career, who who comes to mind for you?

Speaker 3: Jeez, that's that's a really hard question. And there's so many people. Um, you know, I'm a synthesizer. So I draw on different fields and different people. Um, Steve Banks was someone that I, um, uh, his work on doing exploratory modeling was one of the the pillars, uh, for the work that we're doing on option awareness and, uh, he approached this from a, uh, computer science, uh, kind of approach, and, um, um, the presentation of this information to people was just a convenient way of presenting the information. And so we started with there and said, you know, this exploratory modeling can can provide insight into, um, uh, the plausible outcomes of, uh, different options, which is how he was applying it. But we said, can we look at how to do that visualization, uh, better? And so we looked at the work on, uh, visualization and actually pushed the envelope on that since, um, comparing, um, distributions with each other, which is have, which is involved in in in what we're doing, um, um, didn't have a lot to say at the time. Um, so his work was involved there, Chandra Sakarin's work, um, on, on, uh, modeling and simulation and dealing with, uh, deep uncertainty, uh, was work, um, uh, Coneman and Tversky, I could just name, go on and on and name a whole bunch, um, that were all pillars. Um, he told a very interesting story at one of the, uh, AI conferences, where, um, they were sitting down, um, and, uh, uh, in a bar and, um, and, uh, um, a, um, server came up to them and said, can I get you a drink? And he said, uh, the our our focus, our goal for AI is to make something more intelligent than that. Something that would ask someone sitting in a bar whether they wanted a drink or not. It was funny at the time. Um, um, so, um, but he's done work on, uh, on, um, uh, simulation modeling and, uh, dealing with, um, deep uncertainty that is, um, unresolvable uncertainty in uh, decision situations. I'll send you a a reference. Um, when we're done. Okay, thanks. Um, but, uh, his work, uh, Winston's work, um, fed part of this. Um, the work by, um, um, Sarah Lichtenstein and and her, um, compatriots, um, or Fishoff, I turned to them as my example of, um, how to write stuff that other people can understand. They, um, um, some of the most, um, um, cogent, um, writing on psychology and the work that they've done did in, um, decision making as well, has triggered it. As I said, Coneman and Tversky and the work that they did on heuristics, um, and, uh, that that we've we've dealt with. Um, just there's just been a whole lot that we've synthesized together into the the kind the things that we're doing right now.

Speaker 2: Neat. Yeah, yeah. So you're kind of characterization of yourself as a synthesizer, someone who's really looking across disciplines and just pulling together these disparate things.

Speaker 3: Yes. Yes. Which is another reason why I love the NDM conferences because, you know, that's we're all about this kind of cross discipline stuff.

Speaker 1: All right, Gary, our last question is kind of a fun one, uh, hopefully. Um, so we we pitched this uh question to say if you could instantly achieve expertise in anything, what would it be?

Speaker 3: You know, my dad said to me, my dad, um, um, owned a, um, uh, men's clothing store, a retail clothing store. And so it's all about, um, supporting your customers and uh, and sales, sales, being able to close a sale. Um, never to try and sell somebody something that they don't need because you're just going to get it back. Um, and they're going to return it to you. But still, he said, and throughout your whole life, um, you know, sales is going to be important because whether you're selling yourself to get a job or you're selling the product that you have developed, uh, to other people to get them to adopt it, um, sales remain, you know, is is really important. And, um, so if I was to be in expertise, I would pick expertise in salesmanship, I think. Something that I never achieved as as good as my dad. Um, in particular our area, um, um, because it's very difficult, um, to sell what we're selling. Um, we call, um, our work in option awareness, for example, night vision goggles for the mind, because we allow people with our visualizations to see things in this decision space that they otherwise wouldn't be able to see, to see a landscape of plausible outcomes for the decisions they're making. Now, you're trying to sell that to somebody who by definition can't see it without the stuff that you're selling to them, right? And so, how do they know what they're seeing is real, um, and and what you're selling to them is real. And you're in environments where um, uncertainty is a is an inherent part of the environment. So you can't even prove it to them by saying, look, all the decisions come out right when you follow when you view this because they don't always come out right when you do it. So, um, it's a very difficult sales situation to be in. Um, and, um, we have faced this uh with a lot of people. Um, there's often an aha, uh, yeah, that's exactly what I want and I understand the fact that this is is normally more complicated, and I know it's more complicated than I understand and if you can give me some way of dealing with a higher level of complication, that's great. And in other cases, uh, not so much. Um, as we know in uh, cognitive systems engineering, a lot of the work that that all of us do, um, it's very difficult to, um, um, uh, involve, get cognitive systems engineering involved from the very beginning of a project. Um, because the benefits of cognitive systems engineering come at the end of the project when the whole system's done and you're seeing how people can use the system better than they otherwise could. Well, that's a very difficult sales thing to to engage in as well. Um, how do you convince people that cognitive systems engineering will make the system better and will make them make people be able to use it better. Um, when you don't have the system there and cognitively systems engineered to show them how that's going to happen. So we we often find ourselves in this kind of catch 22, um, uh, uh, situation, chicken and the egg situation, uh, which makes us a very different difficult sales environment. So if I could be better at that, we could perhaps get more people to, um, adopt what we're, um, selling, um, more quickly and, um, you know, the the advantage to that is, uh, better evidence-based decision making in complicated environments, which right now, um, in this place and in this time, we certainly all find ourselves, um, in the midst of this pandemic, um, trying to convince people even to wear masks, um, as they leave when they go out, um, is a difficult sales job, um, to do because again, the benefits of that is not to you, it's to other people, and it's a long-term benefit, not an immediate benefit, how do we get people to see these things? So, um, that's really, I I guess, I I go back to what my dad said so many years ago, um, this is is really an important uh skill, uh, to be able to attain.

Speaker 1: That is a great answer and I think we've all had those days when we just wish we were selling somebody underpants because everybody needs them, they know they need them. If they need fresh ones all the time. And and you can just make that case a lot easier than the cases you just described. I can appreciate that. Well, Gary, thank you so much for joining us. This has been terrific. Uh, it's been a a good uh good time catching up with you and uh and and hope to see you again down the road at the NDM conferences and elsewhere. Um, and I certainly have a couple of things I know I'll be looking into uh after this podcast that uh that certainly peaked my interest. So thank you so much for joining us.

Speaker 2: You're welcome.

Speaker 1: And uh, and on that note, uh, for the NDM podcast, I'm Brian Moon.

Speaker 2: And I'm Laura Milattello. Learn more about Naturalistic Decision Making and where to follow us by visiting naturalisticdecisionmaking.org.