(Music)
(Music)
(Music)
(Music)
(Music)
(Music)
(Music)
(Music)
(Music)
Speaker 1: The Naturalistic Decision Making podcast with Brian Moon and Laura Millatello. This podcast series brings you interviews with leading NDM researchers who study and support people who make decisions under stress.
Speaker 2: Welcome to the Naturalistic Decision Making podcast. This is Brian Moon from Paragean Technologies.
Speaker 3: And I'm Laura Millatello from Applied Decision Science.
Speaker 2: We're pleased to be talking today with Joel Suss. Joel is assistant professor of Human Factors in the Department of Psychology at Wichita State University. His research work focuses on understanding and improving perceptual cognitive performance. In particular, anticipation and decision making in complex and challenging operational settings such as law enforcement, security, military command and control, aviation, and emergency medicine. He has examined perceptual and cognitive aspects of CCT TV monitoring and now automated intelligent video surveillance systems are changing the human operator's role in security surveillance. Joel is perhaps best known for his work investigating ways to train police officers to make better decisions in stressful situations. Originally from Australia, Joel completed his PhD in Applied cognitive science and Human Factors at Michigan Technological University. Welcome Joel and thanks for joining us.
Speaker 4: Thank you Brian for having me on. I really appreciate it. And Laura.
Speaker 2: So let's just jump right in. Uh your work in police training is particularly relevant at the moment. Uh I wonder if you could sort of tell us how you first got involved with researching law enforcement.
Speaker 4: Sure, sure. I'd love to. So I was back in Australia uh where I was born and I was working for a time in the private security industry and over time I moved into the training role where I was training some people in use of force, so things like defensive tactics or hand-to-hand combat, that kind of thing. Uh firearms, batons, decision making under stress. And I ended up asking myself why are we training people the way that we're training them? How do we know that this way works? And in that field, the answer normally is because that's what we've always done or this is the way that I was trained so this is the way that I'm going to train people. And I wasn't uh really satisfied with that. And so I started hunting down information and that led me on a search which took quite quite a while. Um there was internet back in those days but it wasn't like it is now. And eventually I ended up coming across Gary Klein's book sources of power. I found it online. Um, I'm pretty confident there was no Amazon in those days or there was no, you know, one or one day shipping. And so I was in Australia. I looked up which library had that book. The very next day I went to the library, read the book and said, ah, I think this is it. I think I've kind of found the area that that might be interesting. And so I ended up writing to someone or just in general sent an email to Gary's company and someone there put me in touch with a couple of people in Australia who were doing work in the NDM community, um namely Mary Odi and Gavin Litern and I was lucky enough to to meet with them and get some guidance from uh from them and I was basically told well, you need to go and study psychology and then go get a graduate degree in psychology. So I thought okay, I'll do that. And I did my undergraduate psychology degree in Australia and then I was looking to, you know, focus on things in law enforcement and there just wasn't I didn't see much opportunity to do that in Australia. And so I started looking for opportunities elsewhere and I I applied to graduate schools in the United States and was lucky to end up at the beginning of my degree with um at Florida State University in the cognitive psychology program with Paul Ward as my advisor and he had done some work on expertise and perceptual cognitive expertise in law enforcement before. and I kind of carried that on or got inculcated into that in a way and that's how I got involved with researching law enforcement.
Speaker 2: So your operational experiences sounds like was uh was kind of a driver and I wonder if you could think back to those days and and maybe articulate sort of what you were training and and maybe your operational experience and other than this is sort of just the way we always do it. I wonder were you seeing any sort of conflicts between your own experience uh and then the way it was being trained?
Speaker 4: Um I I think I was lucky to be training with a a group of very thoughtful people. Uh together we put a lot of thought into the way that we were doing things. Um, you know, I was never a law enforcement officer, um, so I I've got kind of very minimal experience, you know, the operational stuff that I did was standing outside buildings looking for suspicious activity for long periods of time with not much happening. So uh, you know, I'm I I definitely can't say I have lots of um relevant operational experience, but I've kind of got enough to to to put me in that kind of mindset of what police officers need to deal with. And in in terms of the training, we were trying to do more and more scenario training and put people under stress and we we were doing that and I think I benefited from that kind of training, but one of the things that we found is that doing that and giving each individual their own experience in dealing with realistic situations that are stressful, it takes a lot of time and effort to put on that kind of training. And so what ends up happening a lot of the time is people don't end up getting very much of that training just because it's logistically and logistically expensive and in terms of time it's also expensive. So that that's one of the things that um I and my colleagues back then were were grappling with and just trying to find ways, ways around that. And one of the ways that we tried to do that was to to get people to think to do table top exercises or tactical decision exercises uh to to put them mentally in situations and get them to think about what they might do.
Speaker 2: Right, so those kinds of exercises are are certainly uh ones that would be uh espoused by the NDM community. I wonder if you could kind of walk us through also with just with respect to how to go about doing your research in terms of methods, but also maybe as you mentioned sources of power, reflecting on models that you thought saw as particularly relevant uh to your research. Can you sort of walk us through the connections of your of your work and and with the NDM community?
Speaker 4: Sure. Um, well, I spent, you know, after reading sources of power and then really finding out more and more about the naturalistic decision making community, I started reading a lot of work in there, of course, related to to recognize, sorry, to recognition prime decision making and particularly I was interested in the anticipation side of that and how then how that relates to choosing a course of action. So I really um got a lot out of the situation assessment part of things. And in a way how that links with other models like situation awareness. so that there's this emphasis on experts being able to read the situation, understand it and at maybe the highest level to predict what's going to happen. And that may just be predicting what's going to happen in the next second or so. It may not be predicting what's going to happen in seconds or minutes or hours down the track in police situations, things can often uh evolve very quickly. So it may just be uh what might happen in the next couple of seconds, which is the way that a a situation can play out. So, definitely, um, recognition prime decision making came into things. Uh, another model in and I just really got stuck into this a little bit more recently, I I I'm kind of embarrassed to say, but um, flexution. So this idea of um situations or naturalistic situations being ones in which there may not be clear goals at the beginning and it may be interacting with the situation that lets goals kind of percolate up or lets you clarify goals as you go along. And so that's being really pertinent to to some of the current work that I'm doing right now.
Speaker 2: Right, so, I I just a bit of a segue here, uh to maybe maybe more of a sidebar, but um, so I did my graduate work, uh, in in sociology deviance. And so there there's also quite a few sort of sociological models about law enforcement and, uh, and, and the various sort of, uh, factors that go into thinking about how police do their work. Uh, one in particular that I recall is this is this idea of sort of deviance amplification where there may or may not be sort of this initial, um, devian act, uh, but it's the response of the law enforcement to it that sort of, uh, amplifies the way that the, uh, you know, devian, uh, continue to act and so that might be publicized and you might, you know, each side might hear more about it and so there's more attention then to that original act or at least the perception of that original act. And so I've I've always sort of throughout my career kind of compared what I learned in graduate school and the sociological models to uh, you know, to the to the NDM models. And so there there feels like a good fit there in particular this idea that uh, it's that as you said, that original anticipation about what's going to happen in a situation which might very well, uh, have someone draw on their own experience in terms of what they've seen these kinds of situations play out as in the past, uh, or also what they might just anticipate is going to happen whether that's whether that's an accurate reflection of what does happen or not. And and of course, you know, with with everything that's sort of going on now in terms of policing and you know, a lot of attention sort of gets paid to certain, you know, kind of aspects of either behavior or or even sort of personal characteristics of of the perceived, uh, you know, civilian on the law enforcement side. I wonder, um, with that sidebar in mind, I wonder if if this idea of sort of anticipation and uh, and and the way that, uh, that certain sort of law enforcement, uh, concepts like profiling and those sorts of things have played out over the last few years. If you have any particular perspective, uh, in sort of the the NDM vernacular if you will, about that anticipation way that, uh, you know, that anticipation piece where, you know, law enforcement are are anticipating certain aspects of situations, which again, may or may not be accurate perceptions, but it's that initial sort of introduction to the situation. Is that a focus of your research? Is that a focus of your your training? That sort of initial anticipation piece?
Speaker 4: Um, I that's interesting. I I don't think that it's a as you just described it, I don't think that it's a big focus of my research, but I do want to say that the more that I go on and the more that I've had the opportunity to collaborate with people in criminal justice and criminology, I realize that there's lots of other theories out there, ones that I hadn't really been exposed to just being relatively narrowly in psychology and so I've I've kind of I've just realized recently that I've got to get myself up to speed on some of those things uh because there's there's kind of set and long established approaches in criminology and criminal justice that look at police citizen interactions and how they develop. But to to try to answer a a bit of your question, um in terms of anticipation, I think that it's more I'm just taking taking a second to think here. Um, that one of the things is that officers are taught in their training or in in many different academies. They're taught this what's been called warrior mindset that their safety is the number one priority at all times and that any situation can turn violent and that their main responsibility is to get through their day and survive and get back to their families safely. And so from that perspective, that that that leads or that can lead people to just kind of flatly anticipate violence or threat when not every situation is going to be threatening or be equally threatening. And so it's really you know, a way that I think about it and it's it it's kind of simplistic but I find it really useful is just to kind of apply signal detection theory in that not all situations are going to be ones where someone's going to pull a gun on you or pull a knife or where where there may be a really high threat. So it's more of a matter of being calibrated or using, you know, using the beginning of the interaction with a with a citizen to cal to quickly calibrate yourself and try to work out, or in which box does this fit? Is this uh, is this a situation that really has potential for violence? Um, in which case I really need to be on my game or does this seem like it's going to be more laid back, and I still need to be cautious, but I don't need to be thinking at every second that someone's going to kill me.
Speaker 3: So, Joel, I was going to jump in here and just ask you to tell us a little bit more about your um, your training approach. So how how do you help people become better calibrated?
Speaker 4: So the way that we're trying to do that at the moment is through giving people a range of experiences and exposing them to a variety of different scenarios that cover lots of different situations and that challenge their decision making and goal prioritization in different ways. And so just like I was mentioning in in the training that I had been involved in previously in in my own experience, um, you know, police departments do engage in realistic live role play scenarios, but generally again, time consuming, logistically demanding, and so generally trainees don't get that much time or that much experience. And then even if they do or when when they do those things, they may not get that much time spent in debriefing about how they approached it and what they were thinking. There's often um, it it's been in my experience that there's a large focus on the outcome of the scenario. What what did you do and did you end up with the scenario in a good way, rather than the process of how did you get there and really digging in a bit deep. So that's one of the things that I'm trying to focus on at the moment is finding ways to give people just more experiences in challenging situations and then finding ways to give them feedback. And so one of one of the things, one of the main projects that I'm involved in now, which I can talk about uh when when you uh ask me about it, um is really getting at that.
Speaker 3: So let me ask about this project. Okay. What a good opportunity. Okay, so it's a a project that's funded by the National Institute of Justice and I'm lucky to be working with a with a group of people on this. The the principal investigator on the project is Dr. Jeff Roc from Michigan State University. His background is in criminology and criminal justice and then I'm also working with um, a company called Police Solutions. And they have an online training platform that's based around video. It's actually kind of like Shadow box, like Gary Klein Shadow box. And the two people, uh, the two founders of Police Solutions, um, are both PhDs in sociology, Dr. Jonathan Wender and Dr. Brian Lay and they've all, they've also got backgrounds in law enforcement. And so they're kind of focusing on the Shadow box kind of idea for law enforcement specifically. And so what we're trying to do in our project is to see if we can use video and specifically video from police body worn cameras from actual incidents. If we can identify some good scenarios from those and if we can create what we call tactical decision exercises, so online decision-making exercises using those videos where we break it down into a couple of different segments and so you you watch the first part of the incident, you get to a decision point where the video pauses, and then there's a variety of questions that uh can be used to engage the learner in that scenario and we can ask, you know, all the kinds of um cognitive skills that are covered in naturalistic decision making, whether that be anticipation, decision making, so what course of action would you pursue, but also things like goal prioritization, and um, shortcuts, so how would you handle this situation? How might it be different from ways you've been trained, so different from standard operating procedure. And so that's I guess that's the main part of the study in terms of training and we're going to have several different groups assigned to different kinds of that training plus a a no training control group that's not going to get the training at all. And then we've got a in a simulator that's a video-based simulator that's used in law enforcement, they're often called judgment and decision making simulators and really it's just a big projector screen and a computer that has a bunch of pre-recorded scenarios in there that you project on the screen and officers are meant to interact with those and the officer is given a a gun that has a laser built into it instead of real ammunition and so the system can track the the officer's movement and it can track uh what they say, so it can record what the officers are actually doing. And then if there is a need for the officer to draw their weapon and actually fire, so the system will record when they do that, how many shots, where the shots hit, but you can also have other simulated weapons in there, like tasers, which we've got, and capsicum spray as well. And so we're going to be using the simulator as a way of testing performance at at the beginning before people start engaging in the the online training and then again at the end of the training as a post test to see if there's been improvement due to the online video training. So that's kind of in a in the smallest nutshell, that's the uh project that I'm the main project that I'm working on at the moment.
Speaker 2: So, Joel, I'm I'm curious about law enforcement's reception to your work and the work of your colleagues, um, especially going back to your earlier comment when when you were, uh, sort of trying to figure out what whether the training sort of fits with your experiences. What what kind of reactions are you getting from the community?
Speaker 4: So anytime that I start talking about naturalistic decision making stuff like anticipation and goal prioritization to to a lot of police officers and trainers, um, I often get blank stairs. And that just may be my inability to uh, talk about it in a way that's engaging. Um, I think I'm learning how to do that better. Um, but it's it's it's a challenge. And interestingly, you're kind of talking to me about training receptivity and one of the people or a couple of of the people on the grant did a previous funded project that was doing this kind of training, right? What we'd call, um, tactical decision exercises. So sitting down in a room with a group of police officers, showing them a video, stopping it, engaging in discussion, getting them to actually answer questions individually about it and then uh leading a discussion about those things. And they, those people uh, so Jeff Rojak, uh, Scott Wolf who's also at Michigan State University, and again, the people from Police, they did a really nice job. They've written a couple of papers about training receptivity based on that because officers have to do lots and lots of different training in their careers on a on an annual basis and it's every new bit of training is to them, you know, like, oh my gosh, I've got to do more stuff, is this even going to be useful? So there's there's kind of an attitude, um, there can be a negative attitude towards training. And so they focused on trying to assess training receptivity and some of the things that they found are that getting someone like me, even though I wasn't involved in that project that they did, getting someone like me with my background and with a focus on naturalistic decision making, getting someone like that to stand in front of police officers and conduct this kind of training is probably one of the dumbest things in the world. Um, I I just doesn't matter what my background has been. Um, I don't have the credibility. And and I don't have the experience. And so really it's about trying to find people who get the NDM side of things and and I'm talking about finding police officers who get that kind of thing and training them to be the ones that can deliver this kind of training and engage officers in it. And I think that's really important. And and another thing that they found was that it's not just any any trainer that you can get to do this. It has to be someone who really understands this, the whole cognitive side of things, which is something that police officers may know intuitively, but it doesn't get spoken a lot about. They they it's not something that they focus on very much. And so you really need to find people who understand that and who really have a passion for training and a passion for delivering this kind of stuff and that kind of links into one other thing, which is the idea of, um, deliberate practice and deliberate performance. So this idea of constantly developing and constantly pushing yourself and trying to reflect on your own practice. So there's not all police officers are like that. So that's another kind of characteristic characteristic that you'd look for in a potential instructor who could deliver this kind of training to police officers.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it does feel like not only in this domain but in many of the domains we work in, uh, sort of finding those rare birds of, uh, folks who can sort of understand and and speak the language on both sides, um, is an important uh, requirement for for getting the NDM, uh, perspective sort of out there and, uh, and it has to be in, you know, we talk about all this, uh, we talk about this all the time about interviewing and sort of in the, uh, in the language of, uh, of the domain participants, but you're, you're also suggesting our our solutions always need to be, uh, in that same language as well and pitched at levels that, uh, are going to be appropriate for, um, you know, for for the audience but even more importantly in the culture, if you will, of of that audience as well.
Speaker 4: Yes, and and I just find that, you know, dealing with law enforcement that there's there's often, um, a skeptical attitude towards academics in general or, um, people with PhDs, call it, call it whatever you want. And so anytime that I deal with with police, there's always this kind of two and fro where you're trying to establish that that you've got some kind of credibility and and that that you are not out to get them, that you're actually out to to support them and and try and help them. And, you know, it it doesn't really matter that I think I have all the skills and some knowledge that I can use to train police officers. If police officers don't think that, it kind of doesn't make a difference what I think. And, um, I I've I've been lucky to, um, encounter some situations where, you know, I've been told, I've been taken aside by police officers and said, you know, it's clear that you know what you're talking about, right? We don't think that you're an idiot, but you're not connecting with the people and you've got to go and work out how to do that. And so, you know, that's a that's a constant challenge, uh, for me, something that I'm I'm trying to work on and I, you know, I try to liase with law enforcement officers quite a lot. I have a good opportunity here at Wichita State, there's the law enforcement training center that's here on campus. So it's collocated with the criminal justice program at our university and I've got uh contact with some really great people over there in in on the training side. So, I I get to interact with them quite a bit, but at the same time, you know, I've I've that's taken a long time and it takes a long time to develop those relationships. So the very first thing that I did when I arrived here about five years or so ago in Wichita was I looked up to see if the police department and the local Sheriff's office had a a citizen police academy, which they did. They had a joint one. And just to be clear, that's not something that trains you to become a police officer. It's a program that's designed to foster better, um, connections between the community and the police. And so it's something that's just normally it's about 12 weeks, lot lots of cities and jurisdictions have these, uh, 12 weeks, one night a week for about three hours a week and they bring in lots of people from different uh departments of the police and Sheriff's office uh to talk about different things and you get to go to the shooting range and the jail and eat jail food, get to go to the crime lab and all those kind of things. And so that was that was uh a very big step in just me, uh, saying that I'm interested in in learning about the police here and people got to to know that I was, you know, that my um motivations were pure, I guess you'd call it and that I'm not out to kind of get the police or make them look bad.
Speaker 2: Right. Yeah, that immersion piece that you're sort of getting, uh, in that situation, I imagine has has paid quite a few dividends, um, at least being able to sort of speak the same language and and appreciate the the perspectives. Um, I I wonder if, uh, you've already mentioned a few people along the way that, uh, that you've been doing research with and that, uh, sort of helped you, uh, understand what the NDM perspective was. Um, I I wonder, you know, you mentioned Paul Ward, are there other folks that have kind of influenced your approach, um, both within NDM and and also outside?
Speaker 4: Yeah, I I think even though this is a cliche, I think that there's kind of too many to mention, um, or or if you'll let me have a few hours, I'm happy to mention them all, but I don't think that you want that. There's there's definitely, um, people like Anders Erikson. So he just, um, passed away, uh, a week or so ago, unfortunately, but he was, you know, kind of known as the world's expert on expert performance and, you know, I was definitely influenced by him and and Paul Ward did a a post doc with him at Florida State University. So I I was lucky to to have Anders as part of my dissertation committee even when I moved from Florida State, uh, with Paul Ward to Michigan Tech. So definitely there's there's an influence there about just the whole what is an expert? And that's that's been a really challenging thing to to nail down in law enforcement. Um, and it's it's I think it will be a constant challenge because in more traditional domains of expertise like chess, there's Elo ratings and objective measures that can be used and in law enforcement, there isn't such a thing and often people don't agree with what what makes an expert and who is an expert and even in a given scenario, what's a good response? And so even though that makes things hard in terms in in comparison to traditional, um, areas of expertise research, I kind of like that. This is, um, to use one of Gary Klein's words, this is a, it's a squishy area and it's not, um, it's not really amenable to to lab research in a way. And I I I like that kind of thing. I I do some lab-based research as well and I I feel the, I feel the different pools. Uh, and it's it's kind of a challenge to to try to resolve them. So that's a long way to answer, uh, or to give you one name, um, Anders Erikson. Um, and then someone else who I think I I have to name and kind of thank was uh, Mary Odhi, who was involved in the naturalistic decision making community, uh, more back in the in the late 90s and early 2000s. Um, she's from Australia and she did a lot of work with firefighters, uh, wildland firefighters and their decision making in Australia. And I was really lucky to work with her as an as an undergrad in Australia and so she definitely shaped, uh, a lot of the way that I that I think. And and the more and more that I uh, liase and collaborate with people in, um, in criminology and criminal justice, I really get to see different perspectives and so just just, um, again, these are people that I've already mentioned, but, uh, Jonathan Wender and Brian Lay from from Police Solutions, um, they've just, they've just been amazing at at they've got different perspectives coming from different backgrounds, but they've had a lot of experience, uh, with naturalistic decision making and they've just kind of opened my eyes about different ways of looking at at things.
Speaker 3: So, Joel, I it's very interesting to hear the people who have influenced you, but I wanted to kind of think about the other side of it. You have taken a leadership role in helping new people get involved in NDM. You've organized the doctoral consortium for prior NDM meetings. Um, you're currently organizing one for the, uh, Joint NDM Resilience Engineering meeting planned for next June. Um, I wondered what are some of your takeaways from that experience from from helping other people get started in the NDM world?
Speaker 4: Um, I I think I've been really fortunate to be doing that and also I benefited from it myself. So I I'm going to answer the question that that you said, that that you asked me, but, you know, I started off getting a leg up that way myself through uh an NDM doctoral consortium back in 2011. And so I just feel like I'm paying that back now. And, you know, each year that I've been involved in the doctoral consortium, there's, you know, a group of about 10 graduate students from all around the world that have been involved. And it's it's really interesting to me. they come from lots of different backgrounds, they're investigating lots of different things. Um, and they come with a lot of passion, but there's relatively few that I see kind of stick around. And so that's that's a little bit concerning to me, um, trying to think of ways of getting people to to continue on once they've got the once they've been involved in a doctoral consortium, uh, maybe even coming back and presenting, uh, the end product of their research there, but then also coming to subsequent NDM conferences. So that's something, um, that's been a challenge. And the the other thing that's also really interesting is that, and this is something that Gary Klein has continually pointed out to me, and with my thick head, it takes me a long time to realize, but there's very, there seems to be very few people in academia, um, who are who are doing NDM type research. And so, um, that that just makes it challenging. It makes it challenging to to find, uh, students because it's not a huge area of research and there aren't that many people doing it in academia, it also, it's not popular like, or not as popular as other areas and so then there's also, uh, an issue of attracting students to do this kind of work. And again, I'll just, um, hark back to something that that Gary said that this this kind of work in this squishy kind of environment where things don't fall into neat boxes, isn't really amenable to a typical PhD where you do, um, experiments and do quantitative work and can run anos and run studies and everything's nice. Uh, it it often takes a lot of time to just learn about a domain and be in a position to to conduct interviews and then maybe design training and and and do that kind of thing. So I'm going to pause there for a second and let you talk.
Speaker 3: Yeah, so I just I just wanted to reflect. I mean, I've been to a few of these doctoral consortiums and one of the things I am, um, that's just very noticeable with me is that often the, um, the folks who are there are just hungry for contact with people who have done this before. So all these things that we're accustomed to thinking about, like, like you said, how do you get smart about a domain? How do you get people to talk to you or let you observe them at work? How do you, um, you know, do these interviews, what what questions should you be asking? And once you have all that data, how do you analyze it? So all these basic questions that is kind of the bread and and butter of our work, um, I'm just struck when I'm at those doctoral consortiums how these folks are just looking for mentors and and and ways to, um, to learn this that that, um, it's not just a natural part of many graduate programs.
Speaker 4: No, Yeah, it it it isn't and I was, um, lucky when I was at Michigan Tech doing my PhD with Paul Ward that he was running a a course that covered some aspects of critical decision method, uh, retrospective verbal reports, things like that. And that was open to I'm pretty sure to undergraduate and to graduate students. But I haven't heard of many courses like that. and just as an example, um, you know, I've been at Wichita State here now as an assistant professor for five years. I I I would have thought that I would have gotten a chance to teach a course like that, a specialty course in my, in what I think is one of my areas of, um, expertise or where where I've got some knowledge to pass on and I haven't got a chance to do that yet. Uh, so, and that's that's been a bit frustrating, uh, to me, you know, and then if it's not done in courses, then the only other option is to kind of, you know, do it one-on-one or in, um, non not for credit workshops with a with a small group of students who who might be interested in doing that, but, um, yeah, it's uh, it it it's challenging. It it really is. Um, and that's why I think I'm I'm still learning how to do it myself. As as as I go along and that's why, you know, I I try to go to to some workshops that are being given by other people at, uh, at the beginning of the NDM conference because I I need all the help that I can get too, you know, to to to me, there's a really to me, there's a small, at least core group of visible people who obviously have, um, expertise in doing this kind of stuff and I do not count myself as one of those. Uh, I, you know, I look to people like you and Brian as people who, uh, are really expert in doing that and trying to get and and and a bunch of others, um, but trying to get knowledge and gain knowledge about how to do it practically is, it's it's a tough thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Well since I look to Laura, you can just look to Laura as well.
Speaker 3: Okay. I was gonna say, I think we all feel like we're learning all the time. It's it's constantly a challenge.
Speaker 4: Um Yeah, but there's but there's there's levels to this and then you, yeah, you're you're you're at a level where I think a lot of people would would agree that, you know, what you're doing.
Speaker 3: Well, thanks, that that's very kind of you and I'm glad I give that impression. Um, but but I wanted to say that I think your contributions in helping students, um, you know, uh, come to these doctoral consortiums, meet the folks they've read about and and make kind of mentoring relationships is really important for the, um, just the growth and the quality of NDM research going forward. So I think your contributions there are really, really important.
Speaker 4: Well, thanks. And I I just I just look at it as as I said, kind of pay it forward because, you know, I I got a little bit of help in in the beginning. Um, and and that's another name. Uh, I think you'll be able to help me make sure that I get it correct because it's a uh, it's an A A person, I believe. Um, Steve Gat. Gat? Right. Yes, Steve Gat. So when when I read um, sources of power when I was back in Australia and then I thought, okay, this is, I need to find out how how I get into this. I sent an email to to applied research associates Client division and I think it was Steve who sent me an email back and he told me about, you know, Mary Odhi in Australia and Gavin Litern, who had some connection to the naturalistic decision making community. And so I got to meet with them personally and and hassle them and, you know, try to work out, how do I get into this? What do I need to do? So I got, you know, I got a little bit of a leg up from them and and so I yeah, I think I'm just trying to I'm in some kind of position where I can help people maybe move forward a little bit faster than I did. So if I can do that, then that's a good thing, I think.
Speaker 2: So I I just want to ask one more question on this issue. So your point earlier about why don't they stick around? Um, uh is really interesting to me because, um, as someone who sort of grew up in qualitative sociology, uh, I I never sort of felt that pressure to, uh, to run experiments and and and do repeated, uh, you know, data collection and and prove things that are even proven. So, um, and and that sort of feels like part of what you're saying is is the pull away, which is, you know, do you have to go through these certain wickets to to to advance in academia and while some people may come in at that doctoral level, uh, they it's just a a brief appearance because they have to do all these other things and in order to sort of, uh, to to advance their academic career. And I I wonder, um, uh, I wonder if you have any sort of ideas just for the community generally about how, how we might mitigate that because I agree with Laura, you know, when you go to these events and and you talk to the doctoral students, they seem very hungry, they seem very interested. They're sort of looking that at that sort of pathways forward and so, um, I I I just wonder if, I mean, this may be a larger systemic issue, but, uh, but I just wonder if you have any other sort of advice for the community about how, how we might point people in certain directions or or help them stay in.
Speaker 4: That's a real challenge and I'm just trying to the best way I can think about that is, you know, my personal situation where I am and the experiences that I've had with with graduate students and the expectations of a you know, I'm I'm part of a a human factors PhD program. But, you know, when I talk about naturalistic decision making type of work, even within the that human factors program, I get kind of strange looks because that's not that's not science or that's that's not experiments. So how, you know, what do you mean you're not going to do an experiment? So it it's even challenging from people broadly in the same in the same field. And so, you know, what's what's a way to to to get by it. I think one way could be to have a, you know, I could have a discussion with faculty in my program and get them to sign off on the fact that I'm going to get students to do uh a naturalistic decision making kind of study rather than an experiment. I'm not sure how that would fly, but I could I could have that conversation. And the other thing that just seems to be the easier way around things, at least at the moment is help students do some kind of, you know, regular experiment that's that that they can do relatively quickly and get it out of the way so that they can satisfy their requirements and then move on to do other stuff. But that's also that's also challenging. Right. Um, you know, I've what I've found that I've had to do is, you know, I I'd love to be spending more of my time doing NDM type work. I feel that, you know, to be on tenure track and get tenure and be able to support graduate students that I've had to focus more on doing experimental work. So I'm doing experimental work that is broadly related to police officers and perceptual cognitive expertise, but if you'll ask my students, none of that is fast work because it all it always involves, um, trying to get police officers or police recruits as participants, that's not always the easiest thing. I also because stimuli don't really exist for the kind for doing that kind of work. We've been creating our own stimuli and so I I so that takes a lot of time for graduate students to do. So I don't I don't I don't always have kind of canned experiments, quick things that I can give them that are really easy to do that are going to have any meaning. Um, so it's it's a constant, I find that it's a constant kind of tension and and struggle. I don't have great answers and I'd love to hear from people that that have some answers or have some ideas.
Speaker 2: Laura, you've got answers.
Speaker 3: I have no answers to that challenge. I I think it's hard, yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 3: And I think the personality of departments shift over the years as you have different faculty and different influential voices as well. But it there it's good that you're there at Wichita and you are an influential voice there.
Speaker 4: Trying trying to be, trying to be. And uh, Yeah. And um, yeah, being being able to build up some relations with the with the police, with the Wichitata Police Department and the Cedric County Sheriff's office. Um, so, you know, when when people, when people see me at the training center, they know who I am, they they have an idea of who I am. I should also mention that I did some what some people would think might be pretty stupid things, um, to kind of gain some credibility. So I I volunteered to get pepper sprayed. What? Um, but that's something that that police recruits generally do. They don't they don't often get to volunteer, they get voluntold that they're doing it as part of their training so that they get to experience what it's like. So I I did that. Wow. Um, and I also volunteered to get tased. Uh, so I I did that. And I have it on video, but I'm not allowed to disseminate it. So, but people, but but it kind of helps because people people know that, oh, uh, he's that crazy guy, he's that professor guy who volunteered to get tased and pepper sprayed.
Speaker 2: I think this could become a part of regular NDM meetings where the domains we study, everyone has to sort of get a sample of what it's like to be in those domains. You could do it as a a pre-conference workshop. Yeah, there's a lot of ideas.
Speaker 3: I love it. Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 4: I'm I'm I'd be happy to uh facilitate that. Um, Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, talk to us a bit more about uh your research and and sort of where it's headed next. You mentioned your, your work with Police. Is that uh is that the primary focus now or do you have other directions you're going?
Speaker 4: Yeah, so that that is the main focus at the moment. Uh this grant from the National Institute of Justice is a two-year grant and the things have been slowed due to COVID-19. So we're we're still basically in the first year of it. So we've got some way to go and we'll probably get it and and no cost extension on it just because of the the delays due to to COVID. So that that is one of my main uh things at the moment and if I can take to I'll try and do it in a couple of minutes. My other main focus is folkai, um, about perceptual cognitive skill and this is the more experimental stuff, but one of the questions that I'm really interested in is looking at, um, anticipation in terms of an officer being able to tell what kind of object a suspect may be drawing from a concealed location on their body. So we often hear about these situations or see them in the media where someone was armed with a toy gun or they had a cell phone in their hand and they did some kind of furtive movement or they had their hands behind their back and the officer thought that they were potentially drawing a gun and and maybe shot them. So this is a really interesting question for me and it it really taps into a lot of research in sports science, which has looked at perceptual cognitive skill and can expert athletes do better at anticipating an opponent's movement than lesser skilled athletes. So I've kind of taken that approach over to the law enforcement domain. So we've created our own stimuli where we had actors, we gave them uh weapons and non- weapons, so wallets and cell phones and guns and knives and got them to put them on, you know, conceal them on their body in different locations and then we film them pulling those weapons and then we basically take each video, which is very, very short, it's only a second or two of someone uh starting with their hands behind their back and then pulling some weapon and aiming it at the camera. Or I should say pulling an object, whether it's a a cell phone, a wallet, a gun or a knife. And then we take that video and we do what's called temporal occlusion. So we create some different versions of the clip where if you think about it, the person's just standing there with their hands behind their back, the clip starts playing. As soon as the person person starts to move, we cut it off and the video goes to a black screen. And so that that would be the first occlusion point, then we have another occlusion point where there's a little bit more of the movement and then we occlude it, we stop the video and it goes to black. We have about four or five different versions that progressively show more of the action and we put a whole bunch of them together, show them to people in a random order and ask them to determine um, if the object is a weapon or a non- weapon. So that's something that that we're doing and I've got a couple of students working on. And then we've taken that a step further to because some I got some feedback from, um, a really another person who influenced me, um, he's in he's in Germany in a city called Ya, and his name is Reuben Canel Bruland and he's a a sport and exercise psychologist, specializing in anticipation and perceptual cognitive expertise and he pointed out to me that at some stage in these videos that we're showing, the the object itself is visible. And so sometimes it's it's really blurry because it's people are moving so fast, but at some stage the object itself is visible and so people can use that as a queue to try to determine what what is this thing that the person's pulling. So, to deal with that, we've gone and made, um, point light displays. So, if you're familiar with, um, any kind of animated movie, you might have seen how they make animated movies where they put actors in body suits with these kind of reflective markers all over them and they film them from cameras from all different directions and they record, they can essentially record the movements of their joints and their limbs. So we did that and so we got an actor, put them in one of those suits, uh, collaborated with some people in biomedical engineering at Wichita State University. And so now we've got a whole bunch of video clips where all you see is a black background and white dots marking wrist, elbow, shoulder, head, hip, knee, ankle. And you see someone drawing something, it's obvious that they're doing some kind of motion, but now you can't see anything. You can't see what they're wearing, you can't see the object. And so we're we're working through that and I've had a graduate student who just completed her master's project using those stimuli.
Speaker 2: Fantastic. We actually had uh Peter Fatti on uh a couple podcasts ago and um and you're you're you're tying it all together for us because he sort of walked us through uh his application of course in sports, but um yeah, it's it's an interesting uh interesting connection.
Speaker 4: And and just to to make that connection even a little bit more uh tight. Uh I'm fortunate enough, um, Peter and one of his students, um, who's doing his his dissertation on this kind of thing with police officers, being able to anticipate what kind of attack is coming. Uh I'm I'm an external member of that student's dissertation uh project, dissertation thesis. So I'm I'm really I've been speaking with Peter over the last year or so about that kind of stuff, so it it's really interesting. And just just to make the connection even tighter, sorry to do this to you. 2011 NDM in Orlando was the first time I met Peter. I met him through Paul Ward, my advisor at the time. And so we've had contact on and off since then and it's uh, yeah, kind of coming to something that we're doing jointly together in a way now.
Speaker 2: We are a small community. All right, our last question is kind of a fun one. And uh, it goes like this, if if you could instantly achieve expertise in anything, what would it be?
Speaker 4: Brazilian Jiujitsu.
Speaker 2: Nice.
Speaker 3: Nice.
Speaker 4: I don't even know what that is. Sorry, sorry.
Speaker 3: I don't know what that is. I don't even know what that is.
Speaker 4: Okay. Um, it is a yes, a martial art, and it's a martial art and a sport and so it's basically grappling and uh, submission wrestling on the ground. And so the opponent the the uh, goal is to submit your opponent and so that's normally done either by choking them or putting some kind of like an arm bar on them and so they would submit they'd tap you to indicate, okay, you got me. Like I'm done and then you let it go and you kind of start again. And so I've been doing that for quite a while. I'm really not good at it, but I like doing it. Um, and it just blows my mind and, um, how some people just get it. They get it and I've been doing it for quite a while and I don't get it like other people get it. They've kind of got some mental blueprint, I can tell that they've got it. I don't have it. It frustrates me to no end. Um, one day, maybe after I get tenure and I don't have to worry about that anymore, I would love to do some some studies, you know, expertise or NDM related uh in that community because there's just so much that goes on about people trying to get better in that community. There's lots of videos online and courses and analysis. And so, I'm I'm hoping, I I have not found anyone that's done anything related to that yet. I I constantly look for it.
Speaker 3: There was a presentation at an NDM meeting in Marseille, I think about, uh, Do you go? It was another martial art.
Speaker 4: Yeah, I think that might have been in Baths.
Speaker 3: Oh, in Bath. Okay.
Speaker 4: I I think I think so. Um, so I know that there there's been some stuff done with some martial arts like Aikido definitely. Um, but no one's done it in this Brazilian Jiujitsu and that's it's actually relatively popular uh as a as a sport. Uh, a lot of people are doing it and there's lots of there's lots of resources out there and there's even lots of online learning resources. So that people put together online courses for people to study at home and so there's I I just see so many questions uh related to that uh and about how people what is expertise in there and what goes on in experts' heads that's not going on inside my head. Um, and then just one other thing to to tie that together is, you know, there's another way that I've managed to make myself known within the the police community here in Wichita is that through doing that citizen police academy, I found out that there's a small group of police officers who get together to train a couple of times a week at the Police Academy doing Brazilian Jiujitsu. And so I got myself invited to train with them. And so that's also helped me kind of become a little bit of a familiar face with people there and there's people because I've trained there with people. I've got some people who will who can vouch for me and go, yeah, Joel's not a complete idiot. He's I've I've I've choked him unconscious a few times. So he's.
Speaker 2: Great. Well well it's clear why you'd want to instantly achieve expertise because it sounds like going through the novice journeyman apprentice levels and that sort of thing is really not much fun.
Speaker 4: Yeah, but you don't you don't have to get choked unconscious, you can just, you can just uh, tap and people should and people should let go. But sometimes people are known to be stubborn. Right. And and I I don't know anyone like that. Um, but yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, on that cheerful note, Joel, thank you so much for speaking with us today. It's been super interesting and, um, uh, I I I certainly hope that the work that you're doing, uh, gets as much and as wide publicity as possible. Um, and then it gets to the right folks who can improve the kinds of domains you're working in.
Speaker 4: (Music)
Speaker 2: So with that, uh, I'd like to say thank you for joining us, uh, Joel and for the NDM podcast, I'm Brian Moon.
Speaker 3: And I'm Laura Millatello. Learn more about Naturalistic Decision Making and where to follow us by visiting naturalisticdecisionmaking.org.
(Music)