[Music]
Laura: The Naturalistic Decision Making Podcast with Brian Moon and Laura Millatello. This podcast series brings you interviews with leading NDM researchers who study and support people who make decisions under stress. Welcome to the Naturalistic Decision Making Podcast. This is Laura Millatello from Applied Decision Science.
Brian: And I'm Brian Moon from Paragen Technologies.
Laura: Today we welcome one of my favorite NDMer, William Wong. Dr. Wong is Professor of Human Computer Interaction and head of the Interaction Design Center at Middlesex University London. His research is in cognitive engineering and the representation and interaction design of user interfaces that enhance situational awareness, sense making, reasoning, and decision making in dynamic environments such as air traffic control, emergency ambulance control and critical incident management. William's current research focuses on designing for transparency in human machine teams. Just a few weeks ago in September 2020, William returned from a two-year industrial sabbatical as principal scientist at Janatech Inc., where he and his team commercialized selected intellectual property from the EU funded Valkyrie project. Valkyrie was an amazing project that I have enjoyed following these last several years. This was a 17 organization research and development consortium that William led from 2014 to 2018. They were tasked with developing a next generation visual analytics and sense making system for criminal intelligence analysts and investigation. He has received over 25.3 million dollars in research grants and published over 120 scientific peer-reviewed articles with his students and colleagues. Welcome William, and thanks for joining us today.
William: Uh thanks Laura and Brian for having me here.
Laura: So, I'm always curious about how people got their start. And I know that before becoming an academic, you served in the military. I wondered if you would just start off and tell us a little bit about your experiences in the army and the Air Force.
William: Well, that's a a long time ago. In another life. I guess I'll I'll briefly talk about my my my army experience, or or one of them anyhow. Uh it was 1980 and I was 20 years old, a freshly minted second lieutenant, in charge of a platoon of about 30 soldiers. We had an incident, one of our soldiers ran a mock, um, during a live firing exercise. He walked up to his sergeant and shot him in the throat at point blank range literally. Uh while my company commander and others were trying to subdue the soldier, I I dashed over to the wounded sergeant. I I could only hear gurgling noises as I put my hand under his neck to support his head. What I felt was uh a bit of a warm mush. Called for the medic and we tried to stop the bleeding with a a field dressing, um, and then we found it it was too small, so we had to use a shell dressing, a much louder larger uh dressing. Uh as there was a fairly large big hole at the back of his head. Uh he didn't make it. Um These things don't happen often, but it's hard to forget uh even after all these years. But shortly after that, uh I I joined the Air Force. I think I had too much of these blood things. So I joined the Air Force and I trained as an air defense controller. Uh my job was to provide ground control intercept functions, uh where we use radar to guide fighter aircraft and SAM surface to missile, surface to air uh missile uh to to intercept hostile aircraft. Uh and we also provided what we call the ground wingman functions, uh when our fighters were engage in a dog fight. That is when they are within what 5, 10 nautical miles of each other and all you see on the radar is just one great big fur ball. In in those days we we trained on something called the Marconi um S316 and the L319 radar, long range radar uh in conjunction with a uh set of HF 200 high finders, high finder radars. And these were connected to one of the earliest computers we we've had a GL 161 air defense radar capable of computing and calculating aircraft air intercept profiles. Um, we as controllers interface with the radar system through a what you call a uh a T64 radar console. Uh and we we learned to manually as well, calculate intercept trajectories using I don't know if you remember this, China graph pencils, um and uh templates and overlay templates. Then a few years after that we migrated to a mobile Air defense system and integrated with a squadron of E2C um airborne early warning and control aircraft that we acquired from the US. Um, in thinking back, um, one of the most one of the more exciting events, I guess, was the uh an exercise, a major exercise with the US Navy. Our job was to get our fighters and bombers to a US carrier force somewhere out in the South China Sea. Uh I was on duty as safety officer, monitoring the situation on radar and all frequencies. I think we sent up about uh two flights of about eight aircraft each, uh a flight of A4s and a flight of F5s. Uh this was years before our F16s and F15s uh arrived. Um our when our fighter bomb, when our fighter bombers were about uh 100 nautical miles on the carrier, you could just about see where uh the carrier is, a whole bunch of this these blips appeared on the radar. Uh you you sort of know where the location is. um maybe fighters were launched to to defend the fleet. You could hear over the radio safety net, Fox tree, Fox tree. And uh we we sort of gave up a bit by then. Okay. Fox tree means they they have fired off their their Phoenix missiles against our uh fighters which were by then about 60 miles 60 miles away. And and that was a fun time.
Laura: You were, you were both in the army and the Air Force kind of working at the pointy end of the stick here and this was a time before there was a lot of automation. So, so, so a lot less technological support than than the kinds of um uh uh environment military folks are working in today.
William: Yeah.
Laura: Um, and so just for our folks who don't know what a China pencil is, those were these uh, we call them grease pencils too, I think, but it was almost like a crayon that you could write on a um acetate overlay.
William: That's right. That's it. Yes.
Laura: Yeah.
William: With a a piece of cloth, yeah. nothing nothing cloth. That's right.
Brian: I think we just lost all of our younger listeners by the way.
William: Uh oh dear.
Laura: So, um, so you were doing the kinds of jobs that NDM researchers study at that time in your life. And so I'm wondering how did you uh kind of find your way from there to to um academia and naturalistic decision making and studying the people that do those jobs?
William: That was a, yeah, it was a bit of a convoluted path. Um, shortly after those that that time, I was uh posted to the headquarters of the Republic of Singapore Air Force as a staff officer for command and control. Um, my job was to device methods to to support the Chief of Air Forces um information needs during wartime. Um, I became fascinated by how much and how fast our commander was able to assimilate huge amounts of logistics, operations, Intel, enemy information in very short amount of time and come up with a decision that would set off uh a string of entire operations. So that got me thinking about research. I mean, uh for me the questions uh at that time were I I suspect was things like that. How do we learn about how people make decisions in such settings? How do we describe them in tangible ways that will enable um, you know, system designers to create the right kinds of designs. Um, designs in particular I thought that were important for them to be compatible with the way that these people thought about the problems that they deal with and how do you so that they can assimilate information as quickly as possible. So so that sort of got me um trying to figure out how and where I could go and study this uh this this this this thing. And that's sort of got me started um at at um choosing between university or furthering my career in the Air Force. I chose the university.
Laura: And so what did you study initially?
William: Well, my my undergraduate training was in something called marketing management. Uh, strangely enough. Um, but I thought at that point that it's also useful for me to combine it with something called uh information systems. Um and and back in the back in the days, uh most people never thought of such a combination being useful or possible. Actually I was discouraged uh from from doing such a combination because uh you probably won't find jobs. Um, but as it turns out, um, I eventually uh got into um, uh uh well, marketing gave me a concept of how operations, how organizations operated. Uh and given my my military background as well, that gave me some clear insights about uh strategy, um, and and and how uh things moved within organizations. Uh, technology side, the information system side gave me a lot of insight about how um, technology uh could effectively um, support um, strategies and how we could um use those technologies to give us competitive um uh advantage over uh our competitors and if taking it in terms of the military that's our enemies. So that's a bit of my uh undergraduate history. I guess, um, when I started my PhD work, I was I was introduced to um, uh my my my first supervisor then uh a chap by the name of um David O'Hair. Um, and and and he sort of introduced me to um uh the field of NDM. Um, he he when I told him about the kinds of domains that I was interested in working with, uh he told me, oh, you should read Gary Klein.
Laura: Hmm.
William: Uh, funny enough. Uh, so he he he gave me a number of uh materials to read the um about the NDM, um, the the RPD model, um, and quite critical at that point in time, uh the critical decision method. And how it could be used as a basis for qualitative research, um, to to to to discover uh some of the soft things like decisions, strategies, and how I could then use that to to to to design interfaces for controlling complex uh dynamic processes. Uh, yeah, and and and and David at that time as well, David O'Hair, um introduced me to to Jan's Rasmuson's work.
Laura: Ah.
William: And at that point in time, I tell you, I just found it totally impenetrable. Um, however, I knew that somewhere in there, there was something that I needed uh to know. And I guess eventually as I got to know more about the field, um I discovered another person's work which was very, very helpful. Uh Chris Wickens. Um, his ideas, uh particularly those that were embedded in the proximity compatibility principle, uh, that made a lot of sense to me when we were trying to design systems, uh and interfaces, how do you how do you move, how do you uh design uh representations. At that time, I also needed to figure out how to to find the information that I needed about the processes and the cognitive work that we were trying to create designs for. Um, I came across again, one of Gary's older uh pieces of work, the state of the art report at the DTIC, uh something called Naturalistic Decision Making Implications for Design. And as I was interested in design, I began to see how Gary's work could help me uncover the information about the work, and Chris's work on the PCP could then guide how I could create those designs. And soon after that, um, I I I came across, stumbled across a book called the psychology of everyday things.
Laura: Hmm.
William: And at that time, I was teaching usability engineering at um, uh in in in in at at Otago and I I found that this the the standard usability uh methods were were were just too prescriptive. Don Norman's principles, I found them very liberating. His work helped me understand uh that we rationally we can rationally uh create user interface designs, um and and and that these designs were not just warm and fuzzy stuff. Uh, but in theory they could be deconstructed to the first principles. And and as I was working in that kind of area, I I got to know uh a very, um, uh, bright uh professor, uh, her name's Penny Sanderson.
Laura: Hmm. Yeah.
William: Yes, she was amazing. Uh she influenced my career in a really big way. Um, when I graduated from from my PhD program shortly after that, uh, she took me along on one of um, uh field uh research trips. Uh we were we were on a project to design a cognitive systems engineering based UI for hydro electricity generation company in in Australia. This uh was when uh Australia deregulated its electricity market. So hydroelectricity companies uh now had to be profit driven rather than just managing system safety and water levels. Um, Penny was was really wonderful. She shared uh a lot of her own experience and expertise about what it means uh to be an academic and and to be a professor. Um, yeah, uh, We we we we had a lot of great times together. She also introduced me to um, a chap by the name of Kim Vicenti.
Laura: Oh, Kim.
William: Yeah. it was it was a really strange kind of meeting. Uh because this was shortly after I had written a paper that disagreed uh that you could use CSE models to model intention intentional systems. Uh he he didn't agree with me on that one, which is fine. Um, I didn't think too much about it, but uh through that incident I got to know two of his uh students, Kathy Burns and Greg Jameson. Who apparently shortly after that meeting were tasked or given the task to to write a paper to rebut my paper.
Laura: [laughing]
William: Uh and and and and doing the whole process we we had a great time. We we got to know people at the uh DST and in in in in Australia, Neil, Naker and and and people like Kevin Linton. Uh both of whom were also very helpful in helping me understand this process of cognitive work analysis. So that's a bit about the education side of things. Sorry. Took such a long time.
Laura: No, that was great. That was great. I'm just uh fascinated that you started with marketing, uh that helped you understand organizations and information systems that have, you know, had this interesting technology, and then you had lived these really challenging high stakes um uh jobs. Um, I don't think I've spoken to anyone who had quite that combination at the very beginning to kind of set the stage for their career. That's fascinating.
William: I guess I was lucky and in the right place at the right time.
Laura: Huh, yeah.
William: So even though at that point in time, I probably was thinking, should I have just stayed on and make my career in the military.
Laura: Sure, yeah.
Laura: Yeah, when you're young, those choices are, well, at any age, those choices are so hard. When you have two good opportunities, which one to take? Yeah.
Brian: So William, you your expanding NDM network eventually brought you to a place where you hosted the ninth NDM meeting. Uh so I'm wondering in what ways did that particular event shape your work and kind of your engagement with the community.
William: Right. Wow, we we we're going back in history now, again. We we had uh NDM9 was um in 2009. The uh we we we ran it back in in in uh in London in 2009. We had a wonderful team. Um, Neville Stanton, Mike Strub, uh Julie Ga, Nick Zavaldes, and a couple of my uh students, Gabby Mancero and Nisha Koder Guda. Uh we, I think we had a fabulous time for those of you who were there. Uh the the conference theme was NDM and computers. Uh, from from models like the uh task artifact cycle, we we know that uh technology affects how a task is performed which in turn affects the demands it places on the technology and thereby changing the technology in the future. With that in mind, we wanted the NDM conference to consider if and how technology might be changing how we thought about NDM and what that might mean for the design of technology. Um, and as a result of that kind of uh background thinking, uh we brought in a number of people from outside the NDM community. Um, in from people from the visualization and the machine learning uh communities. So, people like Richard May, uh who was the deputy director at the the Envec, the National Visual Analytics um center uh at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory. Um, John Coolhammer who headed up the uh the visualization and and and graphics and decision making group at the at the Fraunhofer and David Ebert, uh a professor at the Purdue University who was responsible for leading much of the visual analytics uh science um uh area. Uh that was funded by the uh Department of Homeland Security. They presented a panel at the conference um on this emerging area called Visual Analytics and they were looking at examining how visual analytics could support analytical thinking. Uh and this was a fascinating topic for me. I mean, it was the idea of what what they talked about was um uh having an analytic discourse with data. Uh initially it sounded to me like it was just a fancy way of saying uh better interactivity. But after a few years, I think the the pen the penny finally uh dropped. Sure, interactivity was uh a part of it. But visual analytics is intended to support it it dawn on me later, the the externalization of thinking and reasoning by enabling the manipulation of problem elements and information to discover a solution. And this this whole notion of being able to manipulate and construct meaning uh became the calm message of a keynote I gave at um, I gave at um EuroVee or Euro Visual Analytics in 2014, um based on the the the science of um analytic reasoning, uh designing for thinking. So, within the um sort of the NDM9, there was another uh important paper that that that sort of um uh affected my, influenced my thinking. Um, it's it's a paper by Gary and Robert Hoffman, Gary Klein and Robert Hoffman, causal reasoning, an initial report of a naturalistic study of causal inferences. Um, and and this got me um, uh I mean it stumped me then but uh later on when we were in the Valkyrie project it it it started to make sense. Uh cognitive work analysis generally suggests that we we identify functional relationships in causal systems. Uh these these are systems that are governed by laws of nature. And then map them in some meaningful way to the interface. In Valkyrie, the work domain of intelligence analysis and investigative analysis is not governed by the laws of nature, but is instead governed by laws of logic and argumentation. So Gary's and and and and Robert's paper on causal reasoning led me to conclude that perhaps we should not be seeking to represent a visualization of the intelligence and investigative analysis work, but instead to create a workspace that are for constructing meaning around uniquely sequence pieces of information and evidence based on the laws of logic. And and thereby, according to visual analytics thinking, externalizing the reasoning and inference making processes supported by machine learning and interactive visualizations. So, so here is um a bit of how um NDM we we tried to to expand it so that we could bring others into into the field, but at the same time helped me to to to thinking about some of the work that we were doing later on in in in Valkyrie.
Laura: Well, this is so interesting. So one of the things I remember from that meeting is, um, just really crystalizing this idea that doing a careful cognitive task analysis or cognitive work analysis, um is not the same as having a good design, right? And that might even be a different skill set or you might have to um develop, yeah, other other types of skills. Um, I think I think earlier in my career, um, I was so focused on methods, interview methods and analyzing qualitative data and the insights that come from that and I just assumed the the designs, the visualizations would, you know, fall out of that. Um, but they don't. Um, and and so to hear you kind of reflect on that in in a similar way, I mean, not that you were reflecting on that distinction, but this idea that um that you'd read about cognitive work analysis and and you heard this this talk that Gary and Robert gave and that that all kind of clicked for you a little bit later as you were developing these these visualizations.
William: Okay.
Laura: It is interesting how how these ideas that have been floating around just click when when when the right problem presents itself. They come together in new ways.
William: Yeah, doing the conference, it was, yeah, okay. It was very interesting. Thank you. But um, well you think back after what in this case, some some years. Um, it started to make sense that um, you know, if we're trying to to design and we're not just doing a CTA for the sake of it. Um, you know, then then the CTA must feed into to to inform the way we design, but the question is, how do we design? Um, and and very often I found that uh uh that we have a lot of uh people who are very good designers. Uh they they they focus on the the the the how bit of design. They're very good at doing the how bit. Um, but they're they're not very informed about the what is it that we design? Uh which was the the work that you and and Emily and others were were looking at in terms of helping you make it clear, what is it that we can bring out? How do you make um expertise tangible? And if you can sort of articulate expertise in a tangible way enough for designers to get a finger on it, then we can specify use cases and um, you know, design strategies and and and so forth. So, so, so, so thanks for for for your some of the insights that you you guys gave us through the uh the the CTA work.
Laura: Well that that's that that's kind of you to to say that. I was um, I I so I I still think there's some magic that happens if you've done really good CTA and you've articulated these cognitive requirements and the aspects of expertise, and then you have good designers, um, it's still, it's still a creative process. It's not as if um uh having just the right set of of requirements is going to get you there, or having the right designers. You kind of need both and and you need this creative space.
William: You are right.
Laura: Yeah.
William: And and that comes a bit from uh some people call it expertise, and other people call it biases.
Laura: [laughing]
William: Uh, I think if you uh uh somebody trained in in in in design, um and and you're open to to seeing how uh you can represent uh particular problems rather than just presenting on on a particular problem, you know, differentiating between the those two. uh you will find that magic moment.
Laura: Yeah.
Brian: I think the other thing that uh early CTA and CWA work helps to do is to inform what not to do later.
William: Right.
Brian: So so it can so it can provide the opportunity because there's lots of different ways to design and lots of different designs are typically offered, but those initial requirements will help us to take things off the table that we know aren't going to work uh or may um even disable expertise.
William: That's right. And at the same time it also identify things that you can't change in the uh the the work domain and you got to figure out how to work around them. Um, or or worse still uh figure out that there are some things that are important constraints. Um, like for example when we were working with um uh with the hydroelectric uh electricity people. Um, one of the things that we we had to incorporate was uh profit making. Um, but at the same time we got to make sure that the machines don't um exceed themselves to such an extent that they become dangerous. So we put in constraint lines as well as target lines, uh so that the um in in in this ecological interface design, uh that made it possible for the controllers to visualize how far away their systems were um from the the margins of safety, um, but at the same time making a profit and understanding what a profit might be. Um, and and and to be able to to do that, you if you if you were not able to see your your lines of safety performance, then you would put in an extra margin on on safety, but if you knew where you were and you could move your system up say from uh 20% safety buffer to let's say 5% safety buffer, then you could make potentially 15% more profit. So for us that was that that was very handy to be able to know that these were the kinds of uh uh interdependent kind of constraints that needed to be somehow or other represented in the system.
Laura: Yeah. So, so William, I wanted to ask if you would tell us more about the Valkyrie project. I every time I heard a talk about this, I was just fascinated. Um, so yeah, and I know it was a giant project, but I wonder if you could just yeah, tell our listeners a little bit about about that project.
William: Uh, the Valkyrie project. Yes, I will. Uh Valkyrie, Valkyrie stands for visual analytics for sensemaking in criminal intelligence analysis. And its name was partly inspired by Nordic mythology, Valkyrie. Okay, the mercises of the battlefield who decides who lives and who dies. And and in a sense it gave us a a sort of a motivation as well. Uh we wanted to build a system that could through superior information empower police to to fight crime and protect the liberty and security of our fellow citizens. So, so for us that was a kind of um, you know, a noble uh uh reason for wanting to get into this. Of course, there was the money bit and so on, but that's [laughing] Uh yeah, uh Valkyrie was a um, uh 17 organization uh partner organization EU funded project. And we were tasked to research and develop a next generation uh criminal intelligence analysis system that would do four major things that we that we envision. Okay. Encourage imagination, enable insight, to engage with fluidity and rigor, and while ensuring transparency. Um, that that's something that we hope that the um uh the system would do and the system would differentiate itself from other kinds of um uh intelligence analysis systems. At its peak we had about 135 scientists, engineers and police officers from across eight European countries. It was multi-disciplinary. We had experts in uh ethics, privacy, law, cognitive bias, sense making, uh logic and argumentation, uh designers, HCI people, trainers in intelligence analysis, uh and and working with a team of um, uh research and industrial software engineers uh in machine learning,ologies, databases, system architecture, security and uh data access control people. Um, we we we spent a lot of time studying our police colleagues at work, uh in order to understand the phenomena of uh investigative analysis. It it the focus wasn't so much on what requirements do you have, but what is it that you do and and why do you why do you think in that particular way in order to do that. So that was the kind of focus of our uh uh uh field work uh with the with the analysts. We apply a lot of cognitive task analysis to that, but I I I'll talk about that in short while. Um, back to the Valkyrie system that we we we we wanted to build. It was it comprises two broad sets of functions. One, crime analysis and two, uh investigative analysis. In the crime analysis area, um you would do things like uh trend analysis, uh crime hotspot analysis, performance analysis, um primarily to support uh strategic and tactical intelligence. Uh and in the investigation area, um the the issue here was to to to to get your facts, the data, the evidence that you have, the analysis that you have made, uh and and and have them presented on electronic cards that you can quickly shuffle around like the tiles in the game of scrabble. And I think Laura, you you've seen this when at the demo when when you visited us uh years back.
Laura: Yes.
William: Um, and then this this interface is is combined through a machine learning engine, um, that is intended to carry out some of the repetitive tasks requiring human intellectual judgment. Um, such task, for example, um, find similar or associated cases in the police databases, to to automatically populate structured analytic tools such as the comparative case analysis tables. The machine learning engine is also designed to support queries um like um find me more like this. Here's a crime, here is the the report, here are the characteristics within this report, find me more reports that appear to be like this. So that I don't have to sift through half a million uh reports to find the 50. If the system can sift through that and and bring bring to me 100 from which I find the the 50 which I to find that the three that I need, that is still that is an incredible amount of time savings uh already. So so that's what we were trying to do rather than trying to say find me the actual answers.
Laura: So, I'm just going to interrupt for a sec because what I loved about this is it's it's a way to help people find patterns. So you're not having the machine learning find the pattern, right? The human is still thinking about what are the interesting characteristics of this case and I want to find others with those characteristics and then they might explore a different set of characteristics. Um, so instead of pretending like this machine can somehow do the creative problem solving, you use machine learning uh just to support the human in finding cases so they can start to see the pattern. So I I I just thought that um, that was a beautiful design.
William: Oh, thank you. Yes. That is, that is it. That that that's the uh the thing. Yes. So, so we we sort of um, uh focus on the idea of um, um, humans deciding humans decide and and machines doing the heavy lifting. Uh so the heavy lifting in this case was really uh the sorting through the mundane uh millions in order to find those possibly related material from which I can then creatively decide which one makes a bit more sense in the context of what I'm I'm investigating. So, find me more like this, and the other one was there we were focusing on were about associations. Show me what other data might be related or potentially be be related. Uh and and that was quite important in trying to create um uh um awareness of what the situation is and what the situation could potentially be as well. Because you're no longer looking at what are the known relations in that crime, but you're also looking at what other possible events that could have happened that not could have. What other events that happen in that time slot, in that location, um, and who else have been involved in these kinds of things? So if you create a thematic arrangement of of some of the the crimes, you want to know as well, in that particular type of crime, what were the other um, uh participants, what were other activities that were occurring at at the same time. Now, those things are not directly related to the crime incident itself, but they may prompt you to think about, oh, there have been some involvement of a particular gang in this area for some time now. Maybe we should start investigating another link there. So, so that is the notion of this this associations that we were trying to create within the system. So that's that's one part of it. Um, the other the other parts of it is, well, when when we started the the work, I was really intent about designing a system that would focus on actually creating an environment that would enable insight, particularly through the kind of sensemaking uh described by Gary Klein's um data frame model. And in particular his uh triple path model of insight. Uh I wanted the consortium to to share my ideas. So, being the project coordinator, um, I had the liberty of buying 120 copies of Gary's then recently published book Seeing What Others Don't. And I got Gary to inscribe uh them, and and and I gave it to each member of our consortium. Uh and he wrote, my best wishes for the Valkyrie community to gain its own insights and to design ways that promote insights in others in order to make the world a safer place. Gary Klein. He made my day.
Laura: Wow, that's I didn't know that. Um, that's that's really cool. So you you bought a copy of this book for everyone in the consortium?
William: Yep. And uh, well, I wanted them to think about this idea of sensemaking and insight because if you don't have that, all you're going to build is really um, search and retrieval system, which is what every other intelligence analysis system is about. So we wanted things that enable insight. So so Gary he he put the, you know, he he put his finger on it directly when he wrote in the inscription. Um and to design ways that promote insight in others. And that's what we're trying to do. So, so, so yeah, so so so he really made my day there. Yeah. Um, through his work I I sort of started to make the connections um uh between what he talked about then as as playful reasoning uh stances, style and and concrete reasoning style. Um, initially I found it quite hard to understand what that meant until I started working into um the the analysis with our um uh police um analysts. I realized that what this thing, what he meant was that it wasn't two different things, two different styles, but it was a continuum of styles, a continuum of what I uh I call the analytic rigor. And along this continuum, uh we we needed to understand what happens in between. So as we did some of these cognitive task analysis, uh we use uh of course, we used critical decision method because that's what I'm I'm most familiar with uh to learn about uh how analysts think and um, uh, how they dealt with problems during the analytic and investigative problems. We we then uh in order to make sure that we focused on on this analysis thinking process, we we we we tried a number of uh tools. One of them was called the Smart probes. Smart for sensemaking and reasoning tool uh to help us focus on reporting on the inference making and and and sense making activities. Um, what we found from this process uh was um a a sort of a uh a three-layer uh triangle. Uh if you want to think about it that way. Uh the the innermost layer is this what we call the uh the inference cycle. Uh where you see where you see the uh the things like uh induction, inductive reasoning, uh deductive inference making, but more importantly we saw most frequently was abductive reasoning. Um, that led to to to suppositions uh for which they could then create possible conclusions. And once they and and where they start, whether it's abductive, inductive or deductive, uh what we also discovered was it depended very heavily upon uh the kinds of goals that the the investigator has, the facts that are available, lots of facts, very small amount of facts, uh and the experience and the expertise. Uh and that would determine how you you would start with uh an induction, an abduction or deduction. Uh and it wasn't an either or thing but a a matter of combinations until uh you you're able to to uh create what we talk about as uh the three A's. Uh anchoring, lettering and associations. Yeah, don't ask me why the middle one is an A, it's it's lettering for A. Yeah. So, so you would you would create an anchor, um, uh as in uh a starting point. It it gives you, you got to make an assumption about something where you don't know, when you're you're not familiar with or you don't have enough information about. So you you create an anchor. Um, and then you you sort of build on it um as in as in lettering, as in the elaborate process in in the data frame model. And then you you you might want to understand what are the other associative links that may be possible um within the information. So, what you start to hear do is is to understand the situation and to create the claims that are based on actual observations. So once you do that, um and we we started to observe something else. The the analysts make use of their intuition to take leaps of faith to new insights. Okay? And what we started to see was this process occurs very frequently, uh although with varying degree of uh of certainty across across their investigations. Now, if we were to stop there and and and rely on intuition alone, that would be very bad. Uh I I think that would be uh fraught with a lot of errors and and stuff like that. But what that process did for them is that it allowed them to formulate their thinking into hypotheses that could then be tested, uh tested by for example, using structured analytic techniques and this is essential. Without any of these things, it's just it's just playing guessing.
Laura: Hmm.
William: So what what we understood from this this this thing uh in in Valkyrie was that we we needed to to enable them to to to do the very quick generative creative uh thinking that allowed them to speculate, make tentative hypothesis, is it possible, maybe, drawing their intuition. But at the same time transition once they have some kind of hypothesis to test them and to test them quickly enough. And very often that kind of test could be as simple as drawing up all of the information that they need about the case to be able to determine if actually he was in prison that that period. Don't try that particular uh pathway. let's go back. discard that hypothesis, start on something new. And to be able to do that in, you know, in minutes rather than in five days. So for us, that was the uh the, oh, that's what we need to do. And which is why we talked about engaging with fluidity and rigor. To be able to very fluidly and transition this, um, you know, uh uh highly creative to highly critical and highly formal processes and to do that back and forth. So, so that's that that became part of our um the the basic idea behind uh uh Valkyrie and that's, Yeah, uh, so yeah, four years after that, well, uh, project ended 2018, really sad day. Uh, the so the Valkyrie owned by Middlesex University was acquired by Genentech, um, Incorporated.
Laura: Yes. Yes, I wanted to ask about that. So you had a chance to really move out of the lab and, I mean, I know you'd been studying the real world to start with, but then to get into industry and and think about how to, um, commercialize this, make put this into use, uh across the EU. Um, Can you tell us just a little bit about that experience?
William: The commercialization experience?
Laura: Yeah.
William: Yeah, um, I think commercializing one's IP is it sounds really glamorous, but it is also, uh, in my view, okay, my my my personal view, is also horribly painful. Um, it's like giving up your eight-year-old child for adoption.
Laura: Mhm.
William: Imagine you you you lived and and breathed the air with this child for eight years, going through numerous ups and downs, uh, stuck on band-Aids, numerous amount of times on her knee, uh, help her back up on her bike after she falls. And now you will have to give her up and have nothing more to do with her. You can see her, uh but you can no longer influence uh in in her new family. To me, it was a little bit like that. Uh and it took me a a while to let it go, uh to learn to let it go. So, if you are thinking of selling your IP, uh you must be prepared to let the buyer decide how best it will fit in with the strategy of the other products. Because at the end of the day, the companies paid a decent sum of money for it. They must be able to modify and adapt the the the product to make it work for their customers and therefore make a good return. Um, I think the many part the positives as well. Um, trying to make it on one's own as a startup, I think is really, really challenging and some of you have done that. Um, I I I'm not the kind of person. Um, it uh uh while this startups have got a lot of appeal, uh I think um as as you own a business, you have the the the potential of being a lot of uh returns. The harsh reality is that they are built to pay and whilst they are trying to develop your software into a commercial product, you still need to do many things, business development, finding markets, creating need for your product, and then there's marketing, advertising, support, training, maintenance. Uh and worse, worse still, which is what I I I discovered, um, if you're trying to sell into organizations, you have to dislodge existing customers or suppliers, uh or cut deals with them before they'll even begin to talk to you about bringing your business into the organization. Universities and small businesses uh it's we we're not we're not cut out for that kind of of of of the kind of arrangements. It's really, really hard. And other thoughts that cross my mind is is like IP issues. Um, I think it's good if you are first uh that you should be aware of the language of of of IP uh intellectual property and how it is protected and managed. Uh you should find an experienced person to talk through with you whether you want to sell it outright with no records to influence later, or own and control, uh so that you and so that you have a range of um ownership options. Um, that will help you to be a bit more mentally prepared and and and fully aware of what you're actually giving up and what you will get in return. For for me as an academic, those were heavy times. Uh, but I think, yeah, and and and and lawyers they're very important, uh but they're not the persons for brokering the best deal for you. What you really want is the shrewdest business person who has your interests at heart. Once the terms are agreed, a lawyer is, a really good lawyer is indispensable for ensuring that you're adequately protected. Um, I I guess one last thought about commercialization is that um, um, you and I as as as scientists are probably fascinated by the science, um, that was the basis of your our designs that we painstakingly crafted to work so simply. The the sales stuff and the marketing stuff and the advertising folk, um, well, they are the least interested in the scientific principles that you took years to understand to to apply them in the practical setting. Uh, don't be offended. That's just business. These these customers won't won't be, the customers won't be interested either. They just want to buy your product because it works better. And and yeah, so it took me a while to to to sort of come to terms with some of these things.
Brian: William, I'm actually curious about those customers you're talking about. So, um, as as as this was commercialized, is this going to law enforcement agencies essentially? And then the second part of the question is, what kind of pushback did you get, um, if any, uh, either during the commercialization stage or perhaps even earlier in the research stage, uh, from the community. So the, the law enforcement community, those folks who might for instance not really be all too keen to work with new tools and might be, uh, quite pleased to just rely on their intuition moving forward. Did you see that kind of pushback?
William: Um, Actually, whenever we showed Valkyrie to the put the police, um, the the analysts and the investigator says, we want it now.
Brian: Hmm.
William: Um, uh, and and it because it gave them a capability which none of the other systems, um, uh do. They they they often have to work between many different systems, copy and pasting or or doing other kinds of uh ridiculous things in order to transfer data across and and so forth. Uh, and then, um, at the same time, Valkyrie provides a way of assembling their, their facts and their evidence to construct, uh, their, their cases, uh, something which they don't really have, uh, support for other than manually doing it, uh, in, in, in the other system. So, functionally, as well as the, the appeal of the, the interface was something that they, they, they really wanted it. The difficult part, um, was really the commercial, uh, work. So, uh, in, in this respect, I mean, I really take my hat off to the marketing guys and the commercial guys at, at, at Genentech. These, these people, um, you know, they, they know how to, um, uh, how do you call it, um, deal with organizational procurement, um, how to, to be able to gain access to it, how to meet the functionality specifications that, uh, are put up by the RFPs by, by the, by the organizations. Um, and then we got to bear in mind that the, um, the, the analyst and users that we are, uh, that who actually end, who end up using the systems, are the people who are not the people who make the, the decisions. Uh, often this is done by the procurement offices and so forth. So, you know, understanding the, um, uh, that there are two different groups that you need to talk to, and and, and the hardest thing I, I found was that, uh, with police forces, especially the bigger ones, um, the big players, the big technology players are already in there. And, and for, for, for us to, to get into it, or for any other else, any other parties to get into it, you have to, you have to get into them, um, by partnering with them. So, you have to cut a deal with them. You got to make some arrangements with them so that, um, for example, if they, if they own the infrastructure, uh, you have to cut a deal with them so that you can plug in your, your, your system to their infrastructure. And, of course, nothing's for free. Uh, and, and how you make that work for the company, uh, as well as for the competitor. It's, it's a strange business.
Laura: Yeah, well, thank you for sharing those insights. I uh, I think you started out saying it seems glamorous and it does. I mean, I think we all many of us, you know, as scientists, we would love to see our ideas commercialized and in use every day. Um, so it's, it's interesting to kind of hear the voice of experience about some of the, the, the, the challenges associated with that.
William: Okay.
Laura: Um, so I wanted to lighten things up and ask, um, tell us one thing about yourself that the audience probably doesn't know.
William: This is embarrassing.
Laura: [laughing]
William: In 1976, thereabouts. Uh, I was in a school play that uh made it to the finals of the uh Singapore's uh national Drama Festival. Uh, these, these were, um, uh, drama festivals for, for high schools. Uh, the play was called Paper Phoenix, and was presented in the style of a traditional Chinese opera, but in English. I played the role of a Chinese scholar, um, in, in, in the traditional dress, okay? Uh, who had the love of his life stolen by a evil overlord.
Laura: Sounds very operatic.
William: Uh, there was a lot of crying, lots of people dying and, and so forth, uh, because the evil overlord was really evil. And as a scholar I, I sort of, uh, reflected back and he sort of, um, tried to, uh, console your, your, your, your friends and family with, uh, this particular phrase that, that comes to mind, um, when the evil are mighty and strong, be like the bamboo that bends but does not break in the blowing winds. So, so that's a little bit about me, uh, that I don't think anybody else would know about.
Laura: Very nice. So did you sing in, in, in this production?
William: Uh, no, we didn't sing because, um, you know, it was the opera setting, uh, but we had a lot of, um, uh, spoken, um, uh, words, and we had the gestures, the movements, um, so we, so we copied a lot of the movements that you see in Chinese opera, the, the walking, the style of walking, the way of holding your, your, your arms, and how you flick your sleeves in order to, to make a point, and how you, um, brush your beards. Uh, so, so we learned all of the movements, uh, from actual, uh, Chinese opera, uh, artist in, in, in Singapore. But we spoke the entire play in English.
Laura: Wow, what an experience. And so have you since then, have you ever, um, done any more, uh, acting? Has that, has that been an interest to you?
William: No, no, no, no more after that. It was fun when we, when we were doing it in, in, in high school, uh, but that, that was it.
Laura: Cool, very cool. All right, so I have just one last kind of fun question here for you today. If you could instantly become an expert in something, what would you choose?
William: Wow. Um, Nuvo Flamenco guitarist.
Laura: Wow.
William: Uh, I wish I could, uh, I, I, I, I watch and I listen to, to, to guitarists like Utmar Libert, uh, Rodrigo Gabriella, um, and, and, and, um, groups like this new group called 40 Fingers. You got to listen to them, uh, Laura, uh, and Brian, if you get a chance. Uh, you watch them play the guitar and, and if you ever get them to play, uh, you watch them play, uh, uh, Toto Africa, uh, it's just amazing. Uh, the, the finger movements, the, the rhythms, uh, the way they synchronize it. It's all pure guitar, but yet it sounds like an orchestra.
Laura: Wow, I will check that out. So I just want to share that I was lucky enough to come to a picnic at your house once, where you and colleagues and friends, uh, performed music. And, uh, we all sang along and that was really fun.
William: It was a wonderful time, wasn't it?
Laura: It was. That was a great day. Yeah, so well, thank you William for speaking with us today. It has really been a pleasure. And so on that note, thank you for joining us for the NDM podcast. I'm Laura Millatello.
Brian: And I'm Brian Moon. Learn more about Naturalistic Decision Making and where to follow us by visiting naturalisticdecisionmaking.org.
[Music]