[Music]
Speaker 1: The naturalistic decision-making podcast with Brian Moon and Laura Millatello. This podcast series brings you interviews with leading NDM researchers who study and support people who make decisions under stress.
[Music]
Speaker 1: Welcome to the Naturalistic Decision Making podcast. This is Laura Millatello from Applied Decision Science.
Speaker 2: And I'm Brian Moon from Paradigm Technologies.
Speaker 1: Today we welcome our friend Rob Hutton. Rob is co-founder and director of Trimetis, a four-person Cognitive Systems Engineering consultancy in Bristol, England. Rob and I started our careers together as young research assistants at Klein Associates in the early 1990s. His thinking contributed to early cognitive task analysis methods, and he helped articulate models of macro cognition. Rob is a fellow of the Chartered Institute of Ergonomics and Human Factors. He's also a part-time lecturer in Nottingham Trent University's Psychology Department. Welcome, Rob. Thanks for joining us today.
Speaker 3: Good to be here. Thanks very much for having me.
Speaker 1: Great. So I wanted to start out and talk a little bit about Trimetis. So you co-founded this cognitive engineering research and consultancy firm in the UK. And I wondered if you could just tell us a little bit about what it was like to establish a small business in this sort of niche field in England.
Speaker 3: Yeah, okay. So Trimetis, thank you for pronouncing it correctly. Um, some people will struggle with that. Um, Trimetis is uh was founded from uh a group of us that were at BAE systems, the Advanced Technology Center, um based in Bristol. And uh we were made redundant from that organization and so we were looking at options for uh what to do next. Um, and because we had similar interests in terms of uh cognitive work and particularly in a defense context, um, we decided to think about putting together our own business. Um, and so we really had a, a uh a ready-made customer uh in the Ministry of Defense in the UK uh through the Defense Science and Technology Labs, DSTL, um who we knew would be uh one of our sort of primary uh customers in the area. So in terms of the business decision, it was relatively uh straightforward. Uh the challenge, as you alluded to, is that this is somewhat of a niche uh area of of expertise and interest. Um, but we had some good uh advocates in DSTL, who were interested in cognitive work in the defense context. And there had been enough uh projects and requirements coming through defense around the challenges of planning and um defense intelligence analysis and related um work challenges that it felt like, um, we had a good starting point and then the challenge would be to uh develop, develop the business from, from there. So that's how it all got started. Um, yeah, so I'll leave it at that for now.
Speaker 1: Nice. So, so you started out, um, with DSTL as your primary client. Has that continued or have you branched out to work with other organizations?
Speaker 3: So, yeah, defense, we've, we've primarily focused on defense as a customer in part because my uh the two partners uh had a lot of experience uh conducting work in military C2, command and control contexts, uh headquarters. Um, and so we had a reputation in that area that was, um, already, uh, already quite good. Um, and that work has continued with DSTL. So we, we had a a good connection with DSTL through my colleagues in work that we've been doing in command and control uh and headquarters, uh cognitive work in a headquarters context. Um, uh the one of the advantages I suppose when we started the company was that DSTL had a large program related to anything that was uh had person or people related aspects of performance in it, uh at the time it was called the Defense Human capability Science and Technology Center, which really was a a funding uh vehicle, a framework through which any defense uh projects that came through that had a a human psychology, social sciences aspect to it came through there. Uh, and that program has had a a long history. It had been running for a few years before I moved back to the UK, probably started in around 2004 time frame and continues to this day, uh, and it's gone through a number of different iterations, but that remains our sort of primary source of, uh, psychologically and cognitive related work. So that's always been a good uh back basis for us. Um, but we've also gone out to other uh, other potential customers and we've done a little bit of work with uh other areas for in academia, um, in terms of supporting educational, um, uh, educational opportunities, lectures, and workshops and so forth. Um, a little bit in the health care area, um, some work for the United Nations, um, international labor organization, uh, and then we've also had other work that has been kind of in the defense security area that's not been directly through DSTL. So I guess predominantly our work has been in in the defense and security area.
Speaker 1: Wow, but still quite varied. Um, so I I wonder if of all the things you're working on now, what what project are you most excited about?
Speaker 3: So, yeah, so that's interesting because uh in the last year I just started a uh another job. So I'm kind of 50/50 between uh part-time lecturer at Nottingham Trent University, um, and with Trimetis uh half my time there. So I feel like I I have uh two lines of uh of interest in terms of projects. Uh on the NTU side, it's about translating my experience and and knowledge into uh courses that uh connect with the students. So that's a that's a challenge and that's really exciting at the moment. Um, on the some kind of Trimetis side of things, uh we're doing some work at the moment relating to going back to my my roots in uh human factors uh engineering uh around human machine interface design and looking at the challenges around uh sub optimal cognitive performance uh as a result of uh human the human machine interface and what we can uh how we can help designers support the human machine interface design uh so it more effectively supports the human cognitive capabilities. Um, so that's one uh exciting project that's going on at the moment. And the other is a thread of work that's been going on for a few years now relating to uh development and learning related to uh cognitive uh performance. And various terms have been used but we've been talking about developing adaptive expertise uh and also um determined we use in the defense at the moment cognitive agility. So trying to define what that means and then what the implications of that are for training and education in a defense context. So they're uh they're all quite uh exciting um and both quite hot at the moment, which is which is good.
Speaker 1: Very nice.
Speaker 2: So, so Rob, you're you're mentioning a few, um, concepts uh that are you know, in the literature and and also you're currently trying to develop them. Uh, but these are not straightforward concepts, right? That the NDM community is sort of full of of theories and perspectives that, um, uh, can be a challenge to understand and appreciate and see their application. I'm kind of wondering as you try to make this bridge between your professional work and your academic teaching, um, are you finding that bridge, uh, is easy to get over or are you finding it a challenge to work with these students, um, to get them to appreciate the perspective and the theories and the, and the problems that NDM challenges and and tries to face?
Speaker 3: Yeah, that's a real challenge. Um, I mean some of this, you know, when you're developing, when you're involved in, uh, an area that's that's still developing and so in NDM, we're, we're still identifying, um, interesting, um, holes and gaps in current theory and and models and methodological approaches. So I feel like, uh, we're sort of on on the cutting edge, particularly in terms of translation from, uh, academic, uh, practice to, um, applied solutions. And so we struggle with these concepts even at a sort of post, postgraduate level, you know, so post, you know, post PhD level, we, we struggle with trying to define concepts that either we, uh, we come up with or that others present to us as as applied challenges. So, for example, the cognitive agility terminology is arisen in a defense context because it resonates with with military people, maybe similarly to how situation awareness came about from the pilot community and then was was jumped on kind of in the mid 80s. Um, so that's a challenge, um, even with, uh, even with people like are quite sophisticated in their understanding of psychology and real world problems. So translating that into an undergraduate context is, um, is a real challenge. Uh, and I'm kind of early at at some level, I'm, I'm early in my, my development there having gone into, uh, teaching, uh, full time, not full-time, but permanent permanently as a relatively late. Um, I'm still trying to get my head around that. So I don't, I'm not, I don't have my own, uh, module or or course at the moment. So I haven't had to, uh, struggle with that directly, um, at NTU, but when I do talk to folk, when I talk about some of the work that I've done in the past in, in the form of a case study, it's a real struggle to translate that terminology to, um, undergraduates who, uh, tend to come, they may actually come with some level of learning and understanding because in the UK at least, we have students who start studying psychology when they're, um, 17, 16, 17 years old. So they come with a couple of years of psychology already. But, um, there is a tendency for those students to be, uh, their education tends to be more along the areas of individual differences, uh, social psychology, particularly clinical, and there's a lot of interest in sort of health, um, and, uh, clinical, you know, psychopathology and things like that. So when we start talking about cognitive work, that's a real, uh, shift for them in terms of what psychology is, which I think is brilliant because psychology is anything that's people related and it's not all about, um, people that are struggling or with health problems or clinical, you know, uh, clinical diagnosis. It's also about how people work successfully or perform successfully in work contexts and life contexts. But, uh, it's, it is a bit of a, a mental shift for those students. So that is a a major challenge that I'm still, uh, uh still have to face to a certain extent.
Speaker 2: Have you been surprised in the way that some students have picked it up or or some students have really been challenged to make that shift? Has anything really surprised you with with your students?
Speaker 3: To be honest, uh, at the moment I haven't, I don't think I've been there long enough to, to feel that. Um, so, yeah, really the, the, the interactions that I've had particularly around the NDM work and the cognitive systems engineering work, has tended to be an in and out kind of thing. So I'll, I'll come and do a a short lecture or maybe a half day, um, workshop. Um, and then I don't get the opportunity to really to to follow up with them very much. So I don't actually know, um, whether some of those concepts have really hit the mark, um, and whether they've really resonated with people. Um, I think actually the more interesting, uh, interactions from the perspective of feedback to me have been when I've had the opportunity to work with students who have contacted me either out of the blue or via, um, my, my network, like you guys and and and folk that I know over here in the UK working in the NDM area, who maybe suggest a student who's doing a PhD or a master's project, contact me about a particular topic and then it's a little bit easier to have a, uh, a better level of engagement and a multiple, you know, back and forth. So I might send something to read and then we might have an opportunity for a bit of an email exchange or a discussion. Um, and I found, I found those, uh, very interesting and exciting because when somebody comes to me with a question like that, it's usually because they're quite highly motivated, uh, and keen to to understand it. So, so actually my, my more, um, productive interactions have probably been with those, uh, students who aren't even my, my students really at the moment. But I'm hoping that at NTU, uh, as I get more, uh, up to speed with what the courses are that are offered and where I might be able to support them and ultimately develop my own, um, module within a, a, a master's course or a, for example, that, um, those exchanges with students will be a little bit more in depth and, uh, potentially more productive and I'll get more feedback from them.
Speaker 1: Nice. So right now, you're, you're kind of a guest lecturer that swoops in with this exciting new topic and, but you you don't get to stick around and kind of see how that plays out. Is that is that is that the case?
Speaker 3: Um, I think that's more referring to the time before I started at NTU where, um, I might get the opportunity having been invited by, um, folk that I've worked with in the past, maybe who are in academia to come and give a lecture to a a class that they're, they're teaching. Um, and so that's been my, my experience prior to coming to NTU. Um, when I was brought into NTU, I've been, I've actually, I'm actually a student again. So I'm learning to be a better teacher, which is really good. Um, uh and exciting. But, um, it's meant that most of my teaching responsibilities so far have been more in the context of uh seminars or tutorials where the content hasn't been mine and so the conceptual side of things hasn't really come up. So at the moment, um, the closest that I've come to talking about some of my work experiences is in a a course that we have, a module that we have at NTU, which is a final year module called professional practice in psychology. And there we talk, uh, the topics are provided by external organizations, which is great because it gives them a sense for how psychology, uh, can help in a real world problem context, but they're rarely about cognitive work. So most of my, um, sort of tutorial and seminar work there is about more like, um, professional skills like project, project management and, uh, risk, project risks and dependencies and all that, all those kinds of transferable skills that, uh, aren't necessarily NDM specific.
Speaker 1: I see. I see. Nice. So I want to now kind of switch gears and, uh, reflect back on earlier points in your career. So I know you have done a lot of field research in your life and we all know that field research is not for the timid. Um, and I'm wondering what is one of the craziest situations you found yourself in in the name of science?
Speaker 3: Oh, good question. So I think probably it was one of my last projects, um, when I was at uh Klein Associates. In fact, I think it was applied research Associates by then. Um, and so it was a project where we were looking at uh interpreting crowd behaviors. So it's in the mid 90s, around 2004, 2005, um, we had a lot of armed forces uh deployed to Iraq and Afghanistan and they were dealing with uh crowds of people who behaved unexpectedly and differently to them. And so there was a project looking at sort of the cultural aspects of crowd behaviors. And we somehow managed to arrange a data collection trip to the Lebanon. Uh, and I found myself on a plane to Beirut with a colleague, uh, Winston, Winston Seek, and another guy who was on the project, who was sort of our chaperone, he was a former US Marine intelligence officer, who had, who was born, who had been born in Beirut and moved over to the US as a teenager. And so we were doing interviews with people that had participated in large crowds, uh, crowd activities around the assassination of the Lebanese president, uh, Hariri, I think it was in the at the time. So they'd had all this experience of, um, being involved in these, these, um, these, these crowds, these gatherings. And we also got the opportunity to talk to the some of the people on the security forces, kind of on the other side of the barrier, so to speak, about how about some, we were using critical decision method, so we were trying to look at examples where they had, had to, um, make judgments and assessments about crowd behavior and what was happening and therefore what to do with their, their resources. Um, and so that was amazing. Uh, first of all, because when I was growing up, Lebanon was a place that you didn't go to and we had a window of opportunity where things were relatively peaceful, and so we were able to travel there. Um, but the crazy part was that one of the first things we talked about was what would happen if things went pear-shaped and we had to escape and our escape route was via boat to Nicosia. And we were talking about all of these, um, these, these crazy things that you shouldn't really have to talk about when you're planning a data collection. But, um, that was a great, uh, a great trip with the people that I was traveling with, the people that we interviewed, the families that we talked to, these these people that were participating in these, um, these crowds and and how they how the how the activities were arranged and coordinated very informally, um, at, you know, before and during the the crowd activities. And then hearing on the other side of it how the security forces were interpreting what was going on and what their mental models of of these crowds was and which was influencing how they how they reacted and and things like that. So that was, that was kind of crazy.
Speaker 1: Wow, that sounds like an amazing experience. Did you have to interview people using an interpreter or did most folks speak English?
Speaker 3: No, you said, yeah, so that was the other, um, interesting thing about this was that, uh, I think we conducted, we, we certainly, uh, conducted the interviews through a translator. I'm trying to remember now, so some of the interviews were in French, which is, um, uh, one of the, uh, primary languages. I can't remember if we were all, if we also had some in, um, uh, I guess it would be, um, uh Arabic, uh, or, or, yeah, I can't I can't remember exactly. But yeah, doing those interviews, I mean, you know, critical decision method interviews are quite, um, nuanced in the way that you ask questions and try and, uh, get at people's, uh, assessments of situations or judgments and how they understood a situation and it's quite nuanced in terms of the language, especially when you're interpreting what they're saying and then trying to come up with a follow-up question. So the fact that that was coming through a processed, uh, means through this translator, made things a little bit trickier. Uh, but certainly, uh, a kind of a notch on the belt in terms of conducting CDM interviews.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, I did this once also. I conducted interviews, uh, using an interpreter. And I remember sometimes the, uh, interviewee would give what sounded like a very long response and then the interpreter would turn to me and say, no, and I would. I would just have no idea what to do with that.
Speaker 3: Yeah, exactly, exactly. No, there's more to it than that. They said something else that was really important and you've just summarized it in one word. Um, but it does bring to it, it does, uh, bring to kind of quite stark relief the challenges of doing, uh, these kinds of knowledge elicitation interviews and how much you rely on the words that people used. I always remember, uh, when I first came to Klein Associates and we were talking about interviewing skill and Beth Crandall would was would always talk about, um, keep maintaining the the interviewee's voice when you wrote up the notes. And part of that was, um, when you're writing when you write up detailed notes, not necessarily verbatim transcripts but trying to maintain even some of the specific words that people were using. And so we sort of lost that as a source of of data in some of those interviews, which was a little bit frustrating, uh, in places, but still fascinating.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah. And in fact, I think this is one of the things you learn over the years as you do cognitive field research is that there are always these unexpected or sometimes expected barriers and so, so part of the the skill you learn over time is is figuring out how to how to get some interesting insights in spite of, you know, the fact that you don't share a language or you only have a short amount of time with these people or or whatever. Um, so when we write about CTA, we, we say, oh, you should have two hours, and you should have two people and it should be in a quiet room and that would be awesome, but it's not always like that, so.
Speaker 3: Absolutely. Yeah, I think, um, I think that's really important, um, whenever I talk to people about, um, conducting CTA and, uh, a lot of people have, have, you know, for example, read the, um, actor applied cognitive task analysis papers, um, and they try and apply it and then we talk about it and they're kind of apologetic that they had to change uh, the way that they did it. And I said, no, that that that's that's exactly, you know, we have to adapt it all the time. There is no right, there is no perfect way of doing it and it will depend on who the subject matter experts are, what the domain of expertise is. Um, but the important aspect for me is that underlying the, uh, the questions and the sort of the general structure of the interview is an understanding of kind of the principles of why you're asking a question in a particular way, so that if you do have to adapt it, you adapt it in a in a principled way. And so, um, that's why I think, uh, you know, when we when we publish around cognitive task analysis methods, we have to have the introduction around, uh, models of cognition and and, and also, um, aspects of knowledge elicitation that aren't specifically about the question that you ask, but why you're asking it. So I think that's so key.
Speaker 1: Yeah, exactly. Cool. All right, so now, um, we're going to ask a different question, again, kind of reflecting on your career. Um, can you think is there one project that starts stands out for you that was particularly rewarding that that you feel like really had a big impact on you or maybe impact on the world?
Speaker 3: So, yeah, it's, uh, it's always when when we do a project, so a lot of the projects are quite applied and so they have a very specific target audience or application in mind. And so the reward comes from good feedback from, uh, from the immediate sort of customer and maybe some of the people that were involved in the interviews. Um, but then you don't really hear about what happened to it for maybe years later. So that's quite, um, quite hard to to gauge in terms of, uh, reward or or benefit. Uh, I think probably, and and there's a lot of those and it's always a privilege to be invited into people's work, uh, domains to talk to people that have a lot of experience and and expertise to try and understand what it is they do and how they do it well. So that's rewarding in and of itself on on all of the projects I think that I've been involved with. Um, in terms of long-term impact, I think probably the methodological projects where we've been involved in developing uh a CTA method or adapting a CTA method, uh has a longer term impact because other people then take those methods and use them, they try them out, they test them, they evaluate them, they adapt them. And we see papers coming up that use those methods, which is always rewarding. And so I think probably, um, mentioned previously the applied cognitive task analysis work, which was probably the first project that I was brought involved with when I, when I left, uh, university, when I left, um, Wright State, to come to work to Klein Associates and that was with you Laura and and a few others, uh, there. And I mean that project ended was probably about two or three years of of effort and then there were publication publications around that kind of in the late 90s. Um, and only last year I was asked to come and uh work with a group at uh Oxford University in the, um, medical, or surgical department, but they were using applied cognitive task analysis to develop, um, technologies to go into hospitals to support the referral process. And they were struggling with usability and kind of technology related issues but they were looking at a, they were using actor to try to unpack some of the aspects of how doctors made referrals from one unit to another. Um, and they had data and we spent some time talking about the challenges they had applying actor, for example, um, you know, we talk about a simulation interview where you provide the subject matter experts with a almost like a case study but maybe in a little bit more detail with a, you know, phases and a little bit more trying to capture the dynamics of the work environment as a sort of a stimulus for the knowledge elicitation and they'd struggled with that with these doctors. So we talked about alternative ways of doing that and how you might adapt it, um, with the intent being that you provide some specific context and specific aspects of the scenario that would, um, exercise different aspects of the doctor's judgments and, and assessments. And so, you know, that project was started probably even before I started at Klein 93, 94 and it's still resonating, uh, with practitioners even now. So, I mean, that's that's probably the the the biggest impact in terms of a project.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that that completely resonates with me that paper that you and I published in 98 on Applied Cognitive Task Analysis is probably the most cited thing I've ever written and the thing I get contacted about most, most frequently. So that, yeah, we we were just starting out but that's turned out to be really enduring work.
Speaker 3: Yeah, and I think the key was, um, taking methods that had were still evolving, um but being used by a particular, uh, very small number of of people and trying to broaden the applicability of the method to a to a broader audience. Hence the applied cognitive cognitive task analysis name. Um and that's absolutely, um, how it's ended up. So, yeah, that that that was a fantastic project.
Speaker 2: So Rob, you've mentioned methods and models and human factors. Um, I'm just curious what are you finding attracts customers to your work today? What what do you think is the most uh valuable uh proposition that you offer to your customers?
Speaker 3: So I think, uh, that's evolved over time, um, and it's partly a reflection on the customers that we have in the UK now. Um, it's quite a different, um, environment from the US, particularly in terms of some of the limitations in terms of budgets and, um, access to uh subject matter experts because there are just fewer around, particularly in a defense context. I don't know how much smaller the UK military is to the US, but significantly. So, um, And so, and and the other element I think is having worked at uh BAE which is a systems engineering uh company and trying to embed some of the ideas of naturalistic decision making and what, what in the UK we would refer to as cognitive ergonomics or cognitive systems engineering, um, that's, uh, that's led me down some, um, uh interesting areas in engineering, in organizational science, um, systems engineering particularly, uh, and the systems engineering processes that BAE, um, was, was using. And so ideas around systems thinking. And so I think the attraction for in terms of the work that I do with Trimetis is that we have a sound understanding and background with respect to the the cognitive science and not just the, the academic literature but also, um, the in terms of applications and how we apply it. That's one, that's one thread. The other thread is kind of the systems perspective. So, uh, incorporating systems thinking types of approaches that are part of the cognitive systems engineering endeavor, um, is another element. And then we get, uh, we do a lot of work in military headquarters where actually there's you you need a little bit of subject matter, um, understanding and also, uh, how we how we apply, um, how we evaluate performance in a in a large-scale exercise, for example, which is, uh, not necessarily it's related to it's field it's field research effectively and because it's a cod C2 context, uh, a lot of it is around planning and and sense making and and, uh, problem detection. So it's it's certainly NDM topics. So I think that package, um, is something that that we are we are known for and sort of respected for I suppose by in the community and that's why people come to us because we bring those things together.
Speaker 1: Nice. So, um, I am, uh, reflecting on the fact that you have conducted NDM research both in the US and in the UK and I'm wondering, um, do you experience cultural differences, um, with regards to doing this kind of research in different, uh, different settings?
Speaker 3: Yeah, that so, yeah, that's a little bit tricky because I don't know, um, whether there are cultural differences in the sense of, uh, we struggled this with this when we were talking about cultural cognition back in the naughties, you know, talking about the crowds behaviors and cultural aspects of crowd behaviors and the and whether national culture overrides organizational cultures. Um, so and I and I think, uh, cultures are a tricky one. I think some of the key differences are more sort of situational and so rather than individual or or social necessarily. So, for example, um, the role of uh of psychology in society, um, is different, I think in the UK. Uh, in the US, most college educated people will have had an undergraduate course in psych, you know, psych 101, you know, the the basic general studies kind of course, and so they'll be familiar with some of the terminology and some of the approaches that we take as psychologists. Um, in the UK, there may be people whose only experience of psychology is, um, from what they've seen on on on on chat shows and, you know, um, Jeremy Kyle, who's our kind of Phil Donnahugh equivalent, um, uh, or, uh, oh, um, yeah, so, so that's a sort of that's a big difference. So when we talk to people about psychology, there's a possibility that there is very little basic, uh, it's kind of folk psychology that we that they have an understanding of. So that's a challenge in some respects. Um, but I think situationally, the other key ones are, um, budgets for projects, and so just in conducting the work, uh, we have, uh, access the the the the budgets that we have that give us the time to access subject matter experts, um, is limited. So we have less access to subject matter experts. So knowledge elicitation, um, becomes very a little bit kind of lighter. Um, we don't have the access to the to the same number of of people with expertise. Um, I think, uh, we also tend to work, my experience in the UK, and, you know, and this is just based on my own kind of limit I've only had two jobs in the UK, um, BAE systems and and my job with or three jobs now I guess, Trimetis and and NTU. Um, I tend to find myself working a lot more on my own than I did when I was, uh, in the US, particularly with Klein Associates. That that might have been a reflection of how we worked at Klein Associates, but, um, we don't have large project teams. Uh, the project teams seem to be smaller and more dispersed. So doing some of the analysis around a whiteboard tends to be a little bit trickier, uh, in some cases. Um, yeah, I think those are so those are some of the, the bigger ones. And in a defense context, the fact that we were, I moved back to the UK in 2008 and we were just, um, we were in Afghanistan already and we didn't leave Afghanistan until, well, we're we're still there but in big numbers until about three or four year, until, uh, until I left BAE really, 2014 15. So, um, that obviously puts a that makes it difficult in a defense context to access those subject matter experts. I don't know if that answered your question, it wasn't really about culture, more situational factor.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know, that was that kind of thing I was curious about. Part of what inspired this question for me was a long time ago, I gave a talk in Sweden and part of my, um, kind of standard talk at that time was to, um, start out and and kind of, um, explain the value of qualitative methods because in the US, um, there's this strong, uh, preference for quantitative approaches and and sometimes even, um, uh, kind of mixed methods where you're, you're, you're trying to inform the quantitative stuff with more qualitative is viewed as suspect and often things that are completely qualitative are, are hugely suspect. And so as I was, uh, doing this talk in Sweden, part of the feedback was, why are you telling this? Of course, this is, so they just they wasn't that same bias toward uh quantitative, um, approaches. Uh, there was just a lot more openness to these kind of field research, uh, interviewing, observation, uh, strategies. Um, so, anyway, that's what kind of inspired the question. I I just I just didn't know if you had encountered any any, uh, differences along those lines.
Speaker 3: Yeah, I think to a certain extent, um, my experience in the in the US, and this is going to be quite maybe, uh, over generalizing. Um, but there there are more distinct, um, disciplinary boundaries, whether those are within psychology or between, between disciplines. And I, you know, um, in psychology, we always talked about kind of, uh, physics envy and hard versus soft science. And then within psychology, the kind of quantitative qualitative stuff. Um, I think, uh, partly as a result of the, uh, limited resources in the UK, the, you know, the scale of that we do research in the UK, people are, and this may be true in other, uh, European countries as well, possibly, is, um, kind of this idea of being, uh, resourceful, having to be resourceful and getting the data that you can get and maybe not being able to, you know, do, uh, large, uh, studies where you've got control and and you're collecting, uh, quantitative data. And so you have to rely more on, um, ad hoc kind of qualitative data collection methods and things like that. And so when you talk to people, it's like, well, yeah, that's just how we do it. Um, and actually that's sort of, uh, yeah, so so I I think I've, I think I've come across that to a certain extent, um, but I think qualitative and this just might be the passing of time. I think the qualitative research has becoming more and more acceptable. I think it's becoming more, um, it's having more, uh, rigor applied to it in the sense of, um, recognizing the challenges of collecting qualitative data, but, but still it's it has to be it has to have some level of, if not systematicity, then level of rigor of analysis, um, so that, uh, yeah, so that we're trying to make sense of of quite varied data sets in some cases. Um, but I think that that's being grasped by in certainly in academia, um, and gaining more traction because, um, people perceive it as being more rigorous. Um, and I certainly think when we were doing the CTA work, um, and with the, uh, with the various knowledge elicitation methods, we never just talked about knowledge elicitation, which is just data collection. We always talked about knowledge representation and the analysis and the level, you know, a level of rigor that we tried to apply so that we didn't fall foul of, um, some of the claims against the validity of those data, uh, and then the subsequent, um, ability confidence in making, um, drawing conclusions and and therefore making recommendations for, you know, interventions.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and your point about the passage of time is a good one. Even now, I find myself less often justifying why we do this work and, and more just talking about the work. Um, so I think, I think you're right. I think the, the, um, mood has shifted even here in the US. And and I think we're better at talking about it too. We've had a a lot more, um, experience, uh, thinking about how to do this in a rigorous way.
Speaker 3: Yeah. Well, we've been banging on about it for a long time. So, that that must have had, that may have have a little bit of an impact in the sort of the circles that we are involved with. So,
Speaker 1: Good point. Good point. Yeah. Okay, so who are three people who have influenced your approach?
Speaker 3: Oh. Okay. So that they are two so two of them are academics, and one, uh, we all know and love. Um, so the first one was probably when I was an undergraduate, there was, uh, my actually my first year, uh, tutor, uh, tutor, was a guy called Dave Oborn, David Oborn. And, uh, I think he's responsible for a lot because in terms of me being being interested in psychology and some of the thoughts that I've had about psychology, um, we had a an essay in my first year as an undergraduate to, uh, it was basically talking about, um, how to make machines more human, uh, and what the challenges were, which was quite interesting. So, um, and and probably, I'm sure we've moved on a little bit, but but in some sometimes it doesn't feel like we've moved on that that much in terms of robots and AI and so forth. But, I mean, this was a long, this was 30, 35, 30 odd years ago. Um, but the main reason that he was influential was because he also, uh, was, um, selling his books to students via a couple of courses that he put on. Uh, one was on ergonomics, which was applying psychology and human performance stuff to the design of work and tools and workplaces, which I found fascinating. And, and then he had another course which he called behavioral computing, which was specifically about the ergonomics of, um, computers. And so this was before desktop computers. Um, I didn't have a computer as an undergraduate. I had to go for my stats analysis, I had to go to the one guy in the department who had a computer. And so David Oborn really got me interested in the interaction between people and technology, uh, which has been fundamental to my my career interests. The second was, uh, John Flack at Wright State University and he, uh, although I wasn't very good at cognition and perception as an undergraduate, he made me, uh, grapple with that. But John was particularly, um, good because he was interested in, uh, interactions between people and tools and people and their environments. And so the kind of the ecological psychology perspective that I still have, um, was born of, uh, a lot of time spent with with John, um, which included things like going to observe surgeries and, uh, work that I did with, um, Cindy Dominguez on the laparoscopic, uh, surgery, so video keyhole surgery in the early early 90s, um, was really fascinating. So it started to give me a sense of the applied work. Um, and so John has been very influential. Uh, and then the other person is Gary, uh, Gary Klein. And I had a class with Gary. I didn't really know very much about him, uh, until he came to deliver a class on cognitive task analysis, um, at Wright State one summer and I'd just finished my master's degree and suddenly, um, Gary started talking about all of these applications of, um, of psychology and particularly around expertise and skilled performance and how understanding that could help us improve, uh, the design of technologies, of training interventions, ways of working, uh, things like that. And the whole idea of knowledge elicitation and knowledge engineering was introduced then and obviously since then I've had a, uh, a very, uh, strong relationship, uh, with Gary, um, as a as a mentor and and a friend. So, yeah, those are the three. Dave Oborn from Swansea, John Flack at Wright State and Gary.
Speaker 2: So you've you've tossed out sort of the alphabet soup of of NDM vocabulary. So expertise, knowledge engineering and cognitive systems engineering. Uh, I'm wondering in this next question, it's a bit of a hypothetical, but trying to get sort of at what you think is the essence of NDM. So you meet a complete stranger who claims to practice NDM, and on the pain of death, you're giving one question to determine if they do indeed practice NDM, what would you ask?
Speaker 3: Oh, how many clauses can I have in the question? Uh, I think fundamentally it's around what, you know, what are your primary sources of evidence to support your analysis of cognitive work? So that's about, um, where are you going to find your, your evidence? You know, what, where are you collecting data? What are the sources of that? Um, and your analysis of cognitive work is is fundamental. So what analytical methods uh or approaches are you using and this sort of harks back to the issue of, you know, quality, yeah, a lot of it being qualitative, um, uh, analytical methods. Uh, and then the focus on the cognitive work is, is cognition in purposeful cognition, cognition in a work context. So in a way, there's embedded aspects of the question. So what what, what are you primary sources of evidence to support your analysis of cognitive work? I think that would get at it and we could spend a good couple of hours over a beer talking about that.
Speaker 2: So that is a fundamentally methodological response that you're looking for.
Speaker 3: Yes. Except that the cognitive work would be in a context.
Speaker 2: Interesting.
Speaker 3: What what, why? What, what would you what would your what other what what are you expecting? Or what have you what else have you what other things would you include?
Speaker 2: You can't ask questions on a podcast, Rob. You have to answer questions.
Speaker 1: Uh.
Speaker 2: So so so I won't tell you what what we were expecting, uh, but I will tell you, um, you're the second person we've asked this question to and the first person gave a fundamentally model-based response. So it's interesting that you gave uh sort of here the the at the heart of your question is sort of the methodology. Uh, whereas our other answer was fundamentally about sort of uh models and and and thinking about how models are at the heart of NDM. So I think that's an interesting contrast.
Speaker 3: Although, let's remember about half an hour ago, we talked about how important it was when you're asking the questions to know why you're asking the question and where the question comes from, and that comes from the understanding of of those models and concepts. So there's certainly a sort of an understanding aspect to it, um, although not necessarily, um, work that contributes to those models necessarily. Yeah. Okay, interesting.
Speaker 1: Yeah, no, I was thinking the same thing Rob that the models and the the methods are so linked, it's really hard to pull them apart. Yeah. You can't apply the methods very well if you don't understand the models.
Speaker 3: You can apply them but you don't apply them very well. Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. All right, so now, um, we're going to move into our fun question. Are you ready?
Speaker 3: Word association one, is that? Uh.
Speaker 1: No, we're not doing the word association this time. Um. Uh, so I work I would like you to tell us two truths about yourself and one lie and we will both try to guess the lie.
Speaker 3: Okay. So I, so I have prepared I have had to prepare this. So thank you for, uh, for warning me about that. So here are my, here are my I'll I'll just give you my my three statements then you have to figure them out. Um, I once met the coach of the National England Rugby team in a hotel at London Heathrow Airport to talk about developing decision-making in rugby players, in international rugby players, world-class rugby players. Um, that's the first one. Uh, when I was a child, I was the lead male in an elementary school Christmas production which was based on the music of the Beatles. Uh, that's my second one. Uh, and my third one was, I once found myself in a situation where I had a badly injured colleague who needed medical attention, and we were at least four days away from any medical, uh, help.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: Hmm, this is tough.
Speaker 2: Laura, you're first.
Speaker 1: I do not think you had the lead role in a play about the Beatles as a child.
Speaker 2: What do you think, Brian?
Speaker 1: Well, the rugby one is interesting because that's just sort of a business development meeting and I don't recall ever reading uh Hutton et all uh International Rugby and the implications of NDM. So, so that one, um, I'm going to go with the rugby story.
Speaker 3: Is that, do you think that's wishful thinking? I think you would have turned that into a project if the uh call actually happened. So I'm I'm giving you the benefit of the doubt on your business development skills.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I wish, I wish that had gone somewhere but it did happen.
Speaker 3: Um, uh, actually, that happened on my way flying back from Beirut to Dayton and, uh, I'd been in touch with a guy who was doing video analysis of, uh, in the rugby context. This is about 2005, um, and video analysis was just becoming big and we were talking about, can you improve, uh, decision-making on the sports field by, um, through, through using video analysis, improving the analysis of video, for example. So that did happen. Um, Andy Robinson, uh, was the national coach at the time and we sat down for about an hour. So that was, um, that was fascinating and unfortunately, it never went anywhere. Um, uh, Laura, you know me well. I cannot think of a worse hell than standing up in front of a bunch of people on a stage, let alone singing anything, even though the Beatles are brilliant.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 3: Um, I was a stage hand at at that production, um, but that's the closest to the stage that you'd ever get me. Um, and the other one was, uh, actually, my, my very first field research, um, as an undergraduate was, uh, in Guyana, which is in South America, and I was, uh, on a kind of a youth expedition with a bunch of people and we were, uh, we were doing this jungle track and a guy got his hand cut by a machete accidentally. And, uh, we barely had any radio communications, um, and we were in the middle of the jungle. So there was absolutely no way that we were going to be able to, um, sort of he you know, use a helicopter evacuation or or anything and we were several days walk from our base camp and then from the base camp to any kind of hospital was, um, uh, was, was days. So, um, but on that expedition, uh, my it was a target of opportunity for my final year project and I collected a load of data around, um, stress and, uh, personality. I did some personality inventories and some health, um, sort of wellness types of questionnaires and some questions about, um, stress in a jungle context. So I should have known then that, um, that I was to end up doing field research in interesting places.
Speaker 2: Was your colleague okay?
Speaker 3: Yes. Sorry, I should have told the end of that story. Uh, yeah, so the solution was, um, he walked back. Fortunately, the first part of the track was on a track that was reasonably, uh, well marked. And so he went back with two, uh, two others. So three of them went back towards the camp and then we had a doctor at the camp who came and she did some kind of emergency stitching on his hand and then they eventually got him back to, um, a facility where they where they so where they sowed him up. But it was quite a nasty, I don't know how many stitches he, he had, but it was a nasty cut across, um, the palm of his hand and his thumb. But he was fine. Yes. I still keep in touch with him.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, I know how much you guys love to think about methods and and what are good questions to ask. I'm not sure we're going to keep this question in the podcast because so far Laura is two and 0 and I'm O and two, although it does get us some really good stories out of everybody.
Speaker 1: Yes. Well, um, Rob, this has been so fun. Thank you for speaking with us today.
Speaker 3: Thank you. It's been, uh, it's been a pleasure. Uh, I was, yeah, I was looking forward to catching up with you. I wasn't so much looking forward to the questions, but it ended up not being, uh, not being too painful, so I'll take it. No, it was really good fun. Thank you.
Speaker 1: Good. I'm glad to hear that.
Speaker 1: So on that note, thank you all for joining us for the NDM podcast. I'm Laura Millatello.
Speaker 2: And I'm Brian Moon. Learn more about Naturalistic Decision Making and where to follow us by visiting naturalisticdecisionmaking.org.
[Music]